Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 10. Yunus, Ayaat 68 To 70

قَالُوا اتَّخَذَ اللَّهُ وَلَدًا ۗ سُبْحَانَهُ ۖ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ ۖ لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۚ إِنْ عِنْدَكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ بِهَٰذَا ۚ أَتَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ مَا لَا تَعْلَمُونَ٦٨قُلْ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ لَا يُفْلِحُونَ٦٩مَتَاعٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ ثُمَّ نُذِيقُهُمُ الْعَذَابَ الشَّدِيدَ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ٧٠
68. They say: "Allah has begotten a son.'' Glory is to Him! He is Rich (free of all needs). His is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. No warrant have you for this. Do you say against Allah what you know not. 69. Say: "Verily, those who invent a lie against Allah will never be successful.'' 70. (A brief) enjoyment in this world! and then unto Us will be their return, then We shall make them taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve.

Allah is Far Above taking a Wife or having Children

Allah criticizes those who claim that He has,

﴿وَلَداً سُبْحَـنَهُ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ﴾
(...begotten a son. Glory is to Him! He is Rich (Free of all needs).) He is Greater than that and above it. He is Self-Sufficient, free of want or need of anything. Everything else is in desperate need of Him,

﴿لَهُ مَا فِى السَّمَـوَت وَمَا فِى الاٌّرْضِ﴾
(His is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth.) So how can He have a son from what He has created Everything and everyone belongs to Him and is His servant.

﴿إِنْ عِندَكُمْ مِّن سُلْطَانٍ بِهَـذَآ﴾
(No warrant have you for this) Meaning, you have no proof for the lies and falsehood that you claim,

﴿أَتَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ﴾
(Do you say against Allah what you know not.) This is a severe threat and a firm warning. Similarly, Allah threatened and said:

﴿وَقَالُواْ اتَّخَذَ الرَّحْمَـنُ وَلَداً - لَقَدْ جِئْتُمْ شَيْئاً إِدّاً - تَكَادُ السَّمَـوَتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ وَتَنشَقُّ الاٌّرْضُ وَتَخِرُّ الْجِبَالُ هَدّاً - أَن دَعَوْا لِلرَّحْمَـنِ وَلَداً - وَمَا يَنبَغِى لِلرَّحْمَـنِ أَن يَتَّخِذَ وَلَداً - إِن كُلُّ مَن فِى السَّمَـوَتِ وَالاٌّرْضِ إِلاَّ آتِى الرَّحْمَـنِ عَبْداً - لَّقَدْ أَحْصَـهُمْ وَعَدَّهُمْ عَدّاً - وَكُلُّهُمْ ءَاتِيهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَـمَةِ فَرْداً ﴾
(And they say: "The Most Gracious has begotten a son.'' Indeed you have brought forth a terribly evil thing. Whereby the heavens are almost torn, and the earth is split asunder, and the mountains fall in ruins, that they ascribe a son to the Most Gracious. But it is not suitable for the Most Gracious that He should beget a son. There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes unto the Most Gracious as a servant. Verily, He knows each one of them, and has counted them a full counting. And everyone of them will come to Him alone on the Day of Resurrection.) (19:88-95) Then Allah warned the liars that fabricated the claim that He has begotten a son. He warned that they will not succeed, never prospering in this world or in the Hereafter. In this world Allah will lead them, step-by-step, to their ruin. He will give them respite and put up with them for a while. He will allow them to have little enjoyment,

﴿ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَى عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ﴾
(then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great torment.)(31:24) As Allah said here:

﴿مَتَـعٌ فِى الدُّنْيَا﴾
((A brief) enjoyment in this world!) meaning, only a short period,

﴿ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ﴾
(and then unto Us will be their return) on the Day of Resurrection;

﴿ثُمَّ نُذِيقُهُمُ الْعَذَابَ الشَّدِيدَ بِمَا كَانُواْ يَكْفُرُونَ﴾
(Then We shall make them taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve. ) meaning, `We shall make them taste the painful punishment because of their Kufr and lies about Allah.'