Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 10. Yunus, Ayaat 65 To 67

وَلَا يَحْزُنْكَ قَوْلُهُمْ ۘ إِنَّ الْعِزَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَمِيعًا ۚ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ٦٥أَلَا إِنَّ لِلَّهِ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۗ وَمَا يَتَّبِعُ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ شُرَكَاءَ ۚ إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَإِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَخْرُصُونَ٦٦هُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ لِتَسْكُنُوا فِيهِ وَالنَّهَارَ مُبْصِرًا ۚ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَسْمَعُونَ٦٧
65. Do not grieve over their speech, for all power and honor belong to Allah. He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower. 66. Behold! Verily, to Allah belongs whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth. And those who worship and invoke others besides Allah, in fact they follow not the partners, they follow only a conjecture and they do nothing but lie. 67. He it is Who has appointed for you the night that you may rest therein, and the day to make things visible (to you). Verily, in this are Ayat for a people who listen (those who think deeply).

All Might and Honor is for Allah -- He Alone has Full Authority within the Universe

Allah said to His Messenger ,

﴿وَلاَ يَحْزُنكَ﴾
(Do not greive) because of the remarks of these idolators, and depend on Allah and ask for His help. Put your trust in Him.

﴿إِنَّ الْعِزَّةَجَمِيعاً﴾
(For all power and honor belong to Allah.) All might and honor belong to Him, His Messenger and the believers.

﴿هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ﴾
(He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower.) He hears the utterances of His servants and knows their affairs. Allah then stated that to Him is the dominion of the heavens and earth. But the idolators worship idols, that own nothing and can neither harm nor benefit anyone. They have no evidence to base their worship on them. They only follow their own conjecture, lies, and ultimately - falsehood. Allah then informed us that He is the One Who made the night for His servants to rest therein from weariness and exhaustion.

﴿وَالنَّهَـارَ مُبْصِـراً﴾
(And the day to make things visible (to you).) bright and clear for them to seek livelihood and to travel to fulfill their needs.

﴿إِنَّ فِى ذلِكَ لآيَـتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَسْمَعُونَ﴾
(Verily, in this are Ayat for a people who listen.) Those who hear these proofs and take a lesson from them. These Ayat can lead them to realize the greatness of their Creator and Sustainer.