Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 10. Yunus, Ayaat 75 To 78

ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ مُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلَئِهِ بِآيَاتِنَا فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا وَكَانُوا قَوْمًا مُجْرِمِينَ٧٥فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ عِنْدِنَا قَالُوا إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَسِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ٧٦قَالَ مُوسَىٰ أَتَقُولُونَ لِلْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَكُمْ ۖ أَسِحْرٌ هَٰذَا وَلَا يُفْلِحُ السَّاحِرُونَ٧٧قَالُوا أَجِئْتَنَا لِتَلْفِتَنَا عَمَّا وَجَدْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءَنَا وَتَكُونَ لَكُمَا الْكِبْرِيَاءُ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَمَا نَحْنُ لَكُمَا بِمُؤْمِنِينَ٧٨
75. Then after them We sent Musa and Harun to Fir`awn and his chiefs with Our Ayat. But they behaved arrogantly and were a people who were criminals. 76. So when came to them the truth from Us, they said: "This is indeed clear magic.'' 77. Musa said: "Say you (this) about the truth when it has come to you Is this magic But the magicians will never be successful.'' 78. They said: "Have you come to us to turn us away from that we found our fathers following, and that you two may have greatness in the land We are not going to believe you two!''

The Story of Musa and Fira`wn

Allah said:

﴿ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَا﴾
(Then after them We sent ) meaning ofter these Messengers,

﴿مُّوسَى وَهَـرُونَ إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلَئِهِ﴾
(Musa and Harun to Fir`awn and his chiefs,) meaning his people

﴿بِـَايَـتِنَآ﴾
(with Our Ayat.) meaning; `Our proofs and evidences.'

﴿فَاسْتَكْبَرُواْ وَكَانُواْ قَوْماً مُّجْرِمِينَ﴾
(But they behaved arrogantly, and were a people who were criminals.) meaning they were too arrogant to follow the truth and submit to it, and they were criminals.

﴿فَلَمَّا جَآءَهُمُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ عِندِنَا قَالُواْ إِنَّ هَـذَا لَسِحْرٌ مُّبِينٌ ﴾
(So, when came to them the truth from us, they said: "This is indeed clear magic.'') They were as if they gave an oath that what they had said was the truth. But they knew that what they were saying was a mere lie. As Allah said:

﴿وَجَحَدُواْ بِهَا وَاسْتَيْقَنَتْهَآ أَنفُسُهُمْ ظُلْماً وَعُلُوّاً﴾
(And they belied them wrongfully and arrogantly, though they themselves were convinced thereof. )(27:14) Musa criticized them saying:

﴿أَتقُولُونَ لِلْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَآءَكُمْ أَسِحْرٌ هَـذَا وَلاَ يُفْلِحُ السَّـحِرُونَقَالُواْ أَجِئْتَنَا لِتَلْفِتَنَا﴾
("Say you (this) about the truth when it has come to you Is this magic But the magicians will never be successful.'' They said: "Have you come to us to turn us away...)

﴿عَمَّا وَجَدْنَا عَلَيْهِ ءابَاءَنَا﴾
(from that we found our fathers following) their religion.

﴿وَتَكُونَ لَكُمَا﴾
(and that you two may have...)

﴿الْكِبْرِيَآءُ﴾
(greatness) means grandeur and leadership

﴿فِى الاٌّرْضِ وَمَا نَحْنُ لَكُمَا بِمُؤْمِنِينَ﴾
(...in the land, We are not going to believe you two!'')