Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 65. At-Talaq, Ayaat 8 To 11

وَكَأَيِّنْ مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ عَتَتْ عَنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّهَا وَرُسُلِهِ فَحَاسَبْنَاهَا حِسَابًا شَدِيدًا وَعَذَّبْنَاهَا عَذَابًا نُكْرًا٨فَذَاقَتْ وَبَالَ أَمْرِهَا وَكَانَ عَاقِبَةُ أَمْرِهَا خُسْرًا٩أَعَدَّ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا شَدِيدًا ۖ فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَا أُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ۚ قَدْ أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا١٠رَسُولًا يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ مُبَيِّنَاتٍ لِيُخْرِجَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ ۚ وَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ وَيَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا يُدْخِلْهُ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا ۖ قَدْ أَحْسَنَ اللَّهُ لَهُ رِزْقًا١١
8. And many a town revolted against the command of its Lord and His Messengers; and We called it to a severe account, and We shall punish it with a horrible torment. 9. So it tasted the evil result of its affair, and the consequence of its affair was loss. 10. Allah has prepared for them a severe torment. So have Taqwa of Allah, O men of understanding, those who believe! Allah has indeed sent down to you a Reminder. 11. A Messenger, who recites to you the Ayat of Allah containing clear explanations, that He may take out those who believe and do righteous good deeds, from the darkness to the light. And whosoever believes in Allah and performs righteous deeds, He will admit him into Gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. Allah has indeed granted for him an excellent provision.

Punishment for defying Allah's Commandments

Allah the Exalted threatens those who defy His commands, deny His Messengers and contradict His legislation, by informing them of the end that earlier nations met who did the same,

﴿وَكَأِيِّن مِّن قَرْيَةٍ عَتَتْ عَنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّهَا وَرُسُلِهِ﴾
(And many a town revolted against the command of its Lord and His Messengers;) meaning, they rebelled, rejected and arrogantly refused to obey Allah and they would not follow His Messengers,

﴿فَحَاسَبْنَـهَا حِسَاباً شَدِيداً وَعَذَّبْنَـهَا عَذَاباً نُّكْراً﴾
(and We called it to a severe account, and We shall punish it with a horrible torment.) meaning, horrendous and terrifying,

﴿فَذَاقَتْ وَبَالَ أَمْرِهَا﴾
(So it tasted the evil result of its affair,) meaning, they tasted the evil consequences of defiance and they regretted their actions when regret does not avail,

﴿وَكَانَ عَـقِبَةُ أَمْرِهَا خُسْراًأَعَدَّ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ عَذَاباً شَدِيداً﴾
(and the consequence of its affair was loss. And Allah has prepared for them a severe torment.) means, in the Hereafter, added to the torment that was sent down on them in this life. Allah the Exalted said, after mentioning what happened to the disbelieving nations,

﴿فَاتَّقُواْ اللَّهَ يأُوْلِى الأَلْبَـبِ﴾
(So have Taqwa of Allah, O men of understanding,) meaning, `O you who have sound understanding, do not be like them because if you do, you will suffer what they suffered, O people of comprehension,'

﴿الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ﴾
(who believe) meaning, in Allah and His Messengers,

﴿قَدْ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْراً﴾
(Allah has indeed sent down to you a Reminder.) meaning, this Qur'an. Allah also said,

﴿إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَـفِظُونَ ﴾
(Verily, We, it is We Who have sent down the Dhikr and surely, We will preserve it.) (15:9)

The Qualities of the Messenger

Allah's statement,

﴿رَّسُولاً يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ ءَايَـتِ اللَّهِ مُبَيِّنَـتٍ﴾
(A Messenger, who recites to you the Ayat of Allah containing clear explanations,) Some said that the Messenger is the subject of what is being sent ﴿as a reminder﴾ because the Messenger is the one that conveys the Dhikr. Ibn Jarir said that what is correct is that the Messenger explains the Dhikr. This is why Allah the Exalted said here,

﴿رَّسُولاً يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ ءَايَـتِ اللَّهِ مُبَيِّنَـتٍ﴾
(A Messenger, who recites to you the Ayat of Allah containing clear explanations,) meaning, plain and apparent. The statement of Allah;

﴿لِّيُخْرِجَ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّـلِحَـتِ مِنَ الظُّلُمَـتِ إِلَى النُّورِ﴾
(that He may take out those who believe and do righteous good deeds, from the darkness to the light.) Allah's is like saying;

﴿كِتَابٌ أَنزَلْنَـهُ إِلَيْكَ لِتُخْرِجَ النَّاسَ مِنَ الظُّلُمَـتِ إِلَى النُّورِ﴾
(A Book which We have revealed unto you in order that you might lead mankind out of darkness) (14:1), and,

﴿اللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ ءامَنُواْ يُخْرِجُهُم مِّنَ الظُّلُمَـتِ إِلَى النُّورِ﴾
(Allah is the Guardian of those who believe. He brings them out from darkness into light.) (2:257) meaning, out of the darkness of disbelief and ignorance into the light of faith and knowledge. Allah the Exalted called the revelation that He has sent down, light, on account of the guidance that it brings. Allah also called it Ruh, in that, it brings life to the hearts,

﴿وَكَذَلِكَ أَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَيْكَ رُوحاً مِّنْ أَمْرِنَا مَا كُنتَ تَدْرِى مَا الْكِتَـبُ وَلاَ الإِيمَـنُ وَلَـكِن جَعَلْنَـهُ نُوراً نَّهْدِى بِهِ مَن نَّشَآءُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا وَإِنَّكَ لَتَهْدِى إِلَى صِرَطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ ﴾
(And thus We have sent to you Ruh of our command. You knew not what is the book, nor what is faith But We have made it a light wherewith we guide whosoever of Our servants We will. And verily, you are indeed guiding to the straight path.) (42:52) Allah's statement,

﴿وَمَن يُؤْمِن بِاللَّهِ وَيَعْمَلْ صَـلِحاً يُدْخِلْهُ جَنَّـتٍ تَجْرِى مِن تَحْتِهَا الاٌّنْهَـرُ خَـلِدِينَ فِيهَآ أَبَداً قَدْ أَحْسَنَ اللَّهُ لَهُ رِزْقاً﴾
(And whosoever believes in Allah and performs righteous good deeds, He will admit him into Gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. Allah has indeed granted for him an excellent provision.) was explained several times before, and therefore, we do not need to repeat its explanation here. All the thanks and praises are due to Allah.