Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 26. Ash-Shu'araa, Ayaat 78 To 82

الَّذِي خَلَقَنِي فَهُوَ يَهْدِينِ٧٨وَالَّذِي هُوَ يُطْعِمُنِي وَيَسْقِينِ٧٩وَإِذَا مَرِضْتُ فَهُوَ يَشْفِينِ٨٠وَالَّذِي يُمِيتُنِي ثُمَّ يُحْيِينِ٨١وَالَّذِي أَطْمَعُ أَنْ يَغْفِرَ لِي خَطِيئَتِي يَوْمَ الدِّينِ٨٢
78. Who has created me, and it is He Who guides me. 79. And it is He Who feeds me and gives me to drink. 80. And when I am ill, it is He Who cures me. 81. And Who will cause me to die, and then will bring me to life. 82. And Who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on the Day of Recompense.

Ibrahim mentions Allah's Kindness towards Him

Ibrahim said, "I will not worship any but the One Who does these things:

﴿الَّذِى خَلَقَنِى فَهُوَ يَهْدِينِ ﴾
(Who has created me, and it is He Who guides me.) He is the Creator Who has decreed certain things to which He guides His creation, so each person follows the path which is decreed for him. Allah is the One Who guides whomsoever He wills and leaves astray whomsoever He wills.

﴿وَالَّذِى هُوَ يُطْعِمُنِى وَيَسْقِينِ ﴾
(And it is He Who feeds me and gives me to drink.) He is my Creator Who provides for me from that which He has made available in the heavens and on earth. He drives the clouds and causes water to fall with which He revives the earth and brings forth its fruits as provision for mankind. He sends down the water fresh and sweet so that many of those whom He has created, animals and men alike, may drink from it.

﴿وَإِذَا مَرِضْتُ فَهُوَ يَشْفِينِ ﴾
(And when I am ill, it is He Who cures me.) Here he attributed sickness to himself, even though it is Allah Who decrees it, out of respect towards Allah. By the same token, Allah commands us to say in the prayer,

﴿اهْدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ ﴾
(Guide us to the straight way) (1:6) to the end of the Surah. Grace and guidance are attributed to Allah, may He be exalted, but the subject of the verb with reference to anger is omitted, and going astray is attributed to the people. This is like when the Jinn said:

﴿وَأَنَّا لاَ نَدْرِى أَشَرٌّ أُرِيدَ بِمَن فِى الاٌّرْضِ أَمْ أَرَادَ بِهِمْ رَبُّهُمْ رَشَداً ﴾
(And we know not whether evil is intended for those on earth, or whether their Lord intends for them a right path) (72:10) Similarly, Ibrahim said:

﴿وَإِذَا مَرِضْتُ فَهُوَ يَشْفِينِ ﴾
(And when I am ill, it is He Who cures me.) meaning, `when I fall sick, no one is able to heal me but Him, Who heals me with the means that may lead to recovery'.

﴿وَالَّذِى يُمِيتُنِى ثُمَّ يُحْيِينِ ﴾
(And Who will cause me to die, and then will bring me to life.) He is the One Who gives life and causes death, and no one besides Him is able to do that, for He is the One Who originates and repeats.

﴿وَالَّذِى أَطْمَعُ أَن يَغْفِرَ لِى خَطِيئَتِى يَوْمَ الدِّينِ ﴾
(And Who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on the Day of Recompense.) means, no one is able to forgive sins in this world or the Hereafter except Him. Who can forgive sins except Allah For He is the One Who does whatever He wills.