Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 26. Ash-Shu'araa, Ayaat 111 To 115

۞ قَالُوا أَنُؤْمِنُ لَكَ وَاتَّبَعَكَ الْأَرْذَلُونَ١١١قَالَ وَمَا عِلْمِي بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ١١٢إِنْ حِسَابُهُمْ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّي ۖ لَوْ تَشْعُرُونَ١١٣وَمَا أَنَا بِطَارِدِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ١١٤إِنْ أَنَا إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ١١٥
111. They said: "Shall we believe in you, when the inferior follow you'' 112. He said: "And what knowledge have I of what they used to do'' 113. "Their account is only with my Lord, if you could (but) know.'' 114. "And I am not going to drive away the believers.'' 115. "I am only a plain warner.''

The Demand of the People of Nuh and His Response

They said: "We do not believe in you, and we will not follow you and become equal to the meanest of the people, who follow you and believe in you, and they are the lowest among us.''

﴿قَالُواْ أَنُؤْمِنُ لَكَ وَاتَّبَعَكَ الاٌّرْذَلُونَ - قَالَ وَمَا عِلْمِى بِمَا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ ﴾
(They said: "Shall we believe in you, when the inferior follow you'' He said: "And what knowledge have I of what they used to do'') meaning, `what does it have to do with me if they follow me No matter what they used to do before, I do not have to check on them and examine their background; all I have to do is accept it if they believe in me; whatever is in their hearts is for Allah to know.'

﴿إِنْ حِسَابُهُمْ إِلاَّ عَلَى رَبِّى لَوْ تَشْعُرُونَ - وَمَآ أَنَاْ بِطَارِدِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ﴾
(Their account is only with my Lord, if you could (but) know. And I am not going to drive away the believers.) It seems that they asked him to drive these people away, then they would follow him, but he refused to do that, and said:

﴿وَمَآ أَنَاْ بِطَارِدِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ - إِنْ أَنَا إِلاَّ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌ ﴾
(And I am not going to drive away the believers. I am only a plain warner.) meaning, `I have been sent as a warner, and whoever obeys me and follows me and believes in me, then he belongs to me and I to him, whether he is noble or common, upper-class or lower-class.'