Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 86. At-Tariq, Ayaat 11 To 17

وَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الرَّجْعِ١١وَالْأَرْضِ ذَاتِ الصَّدْعِ١٢إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلٌ فَصْلٌ١٣وَمَا هُوَ بِالْهَزْلِ١٤إِنَّهُمْ يَكِيدُونَ كَيْدًا١٥وَأَكِيدُ كَيْدًا١٦فَمَهِّلِ الْكَافِرِينَ أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا١٧
11. By the sky which gives rain, again and again. 12. And the earth which splits. 13. Verily, this is the Word that separates. 14. And it is not a thing for amusement. 15. Verily, they are but plotting a plot. 16. And I am planning a plan. 17. So, give a respite to the disbelievers; deal gently with them for a while.

Swearing to the Truthfulness of the Qur'an and the Failure of Those Who oppose it

Ibn `Abbas said, "Ar-raj` means rain.'' It has also been narrated from him that he said, "It means the clouds that contain rain.'' He also said,

﴿وَالسَّمَآءِ ذَاتِ الرَّجْعِ ﴾
(By the sky (having rain clouds) which gives rain, again and again.) "This means that it rains and then it rains (again).'' Qatadah said, "It returns the sustenance of the servants (creatures) every year. Were it not for this, they would all be destroyed and so would their cattle.''

﴿وَالاّرْضِ ذَاتِ الصَّدْعِ ﴾
(And the earth which splits.) Ibn `Abbas said, "Splitting to bring forth plant growths.'' This was also said by Sa`id bin Jubayr, `Ikrimah, Abu Malik, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and others. Concerning Allah's statement,

﴿إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلٌ فَصْلٌ ﴾
(Verily, this is the Word that separates.) Ibn `Abbas said (Fasl is), "True.'' Qatadah also said the same. Someone else said, "A just ruling.''

﴿وَمَا هوَ بِالْهَزْلِ ﴾
(And it is not a thing for amusement.) meaning, rather it is serious and true. Then Allah informs about the disbelievers saying that they reject Him and hinder others from His path. Allah says,

﴿إِنَّهُمْ يَكِيدُونَ كَيْداً ﴾
(Verily, they are but plotting a plot.) meaning, they plot against the people in their calling them to oppose the Qur'an. Then Allah says,

﴿وَ اَكِيْدُ كَيْدًا﴾
(and I, too, am plotting a scheme) meaning, I am plotting such that all disbelievers plots will fail and success will be attained by believers.

﴿فَمَهِّلِ الْكَـفِرِينَ﴾
(So, give a respite to the disbelievers;) meaning, wait for them and do not be in haste concerning them.

﴿أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْداً﴾
(deal gently with them for a while.) meaning, a little while. This means that you will see what befalls them of torment, punishment and destruction. This is as Allah says,

﴿نُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلاً ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَى عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ ﴾
(We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great torment.) (31:24) This is the end of the Tafsir Surat At-Tariq, and unto Allah is all praise and thanks.