Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 11. Hud, Ayaat 91 To 92

قَالُوا يَا شُعَيْبُ مَا نَفْقَهُ كَثِيرًا مِمَّا تَقُولُ وَإِنَّا لَنَرَاكَ فِينَا ضَعِيفًا ۖ وَلَوْلَا رَهْطُكَ لَرَجَمْنَاكَ ۖ وَمَا أَنْتَ عَلَيْنَا بِعَزِيزٍ٩١قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ أَرَهْطِي أَعَزُّ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَاتَّخَذْتُمُوهُ وَرَاءَكُمْ ظِهْرِيًّا ۖ إِنَّ رَبِّي بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ مُحِيطٌ٩٢
91. They said: "O Shu`ayb! We do not understand much of what you say, and we see you weak among us. Were it not for your family, you would have been stoned, and you are not powerful against us.'' 92. He said: "O my people! Is then my family of more weight with you than Allah And you have cast Him away behind your backs. Verily, my Lord is surrounding all that you do.''

The Response of Shu`ayb's People

They said,

﴿يشُعَيْبُ مَا نَفْقَهُ﴾
(O Shu`ayb! We do not understand) This means that we do not comprehend.

﴿كَثِيراً﴾
(much) `most of what you say'. Ath-Thawri said, "He (Shu`ayb) was called the orator of the Prophets.'' As-Suddi said,

﴿وَإِنَّا لَنَرَاكَ فِينَا ضَعِيفًا﴾
(and we see you weak among us.) "They meant, `You are only one person.''' Abu Rawq said, "They meant, `You are despised, because your tribe is not upon your religion.'''

﴿وَلَوْلاَ رَهْطُكَ لَرَجَمْنَـكَ﴾
(Were it not for your family, you would have been stoned,) This means, your people. Were it not for their powerful position over the people of Madyan, they would have stoned him to death. Some said that this means with rocks. It has also been said that this means that they would have cursed and insulted him verbally.

﴿وَمَآ أَنتَ عَلَيْنَا بِعَزِيزٍ﴾
(and you are not powerful against us.) This means, "You have no position of power over us.''

Shu`ayb's Refutation of His People

﴿قَالَ يقَوْمِ أَرَهْطِى أَعَزُّ عَلَيْكُم مِّنَ اللَّهِ﴾
(He said: "O my people! Is then my family of more weight with you than Allah'')( He says: You would leave me alone out of respect for my people but not out of respect for the greatness of the Lord, the Most Blessed and Exalted Does not your awe of Allah prevent you from harming His Prophet Indeed you have placed the fear of Allah,

﴿وَرَآءَكُمْ ظِهْرِيّاً﴾
(behind your backs.) This means that you have thrown it behind you. You do not obey it, nor do you respect it.

﴿إِنَّ رَبِّى بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ مُحِيطٌ﴾
(Verily, my Lord is surrounding all that you do.) This means that He knows all of your actions and He will reward you according to them.