Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 11. Hud, Ayaat 9 To 11

وَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنَّا رَحْمَةً ثُمَّ نَزَعْنَاهَا مِنْهُ إِنَّهُ لَيَئُوسٌ كَفُورٌ٩وَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَاهُ نَعْمَاءَ بَعْدَ ضَرَّاءَ مَسَّتْهُ لَيَقُولَنَّ ذَهَبَ السَّيِّئَاتُ عَنِّي ۚ إِنَّهُ لَفَرِحٌ فَخُورٌ١٠إِلَّا الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ كَبِيرٌ١١
9. And if We give man a taste of mercy from Us, and then withdraw it from him, verily, he is despairing, ungrateful. 10. But if We let him taste good (favor) after evil (poverty and harm) has touched him, he is sure to say: "Ills have departed from me.'' Surely, he is exultant and boastful (ungrateful to Allah). 11. Except those who show patience and do righteous good deeds: those, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward (Paradise).

The changing of Man's Attitude in Happiness and Hardship

Allah, the Exalted, informs about mankind and the blameworthy characteristics that he possesses, except for those believing servants upon whom Allah has bestowed His mercy. Allah explains that when any hardship befalls man, after he has experienced blessings, he is disheartened and he despairs of any good in the future. He denies and rejects (the bounties of) his previous condition. Thus, he behaves as if he has never seen any good and he loses all hope for relief (from his situation). Likewise, if any blessing befalls him after displeasure,

﴿لَيَقُولَنَّ ذَهَبَ السَّيِّئَاتُ عَنِّي﴾
(he is sure to say, "Ills have departed from me.'') This means that he will claim that no harm or calamity will afflict him after this (blessing).

﴿إِنَّهُ لَفَرِحٌ فَخُورٌ﴾
(Surely, he is exultant and boastful (ungrateful to Allah).) This means that he is pleased with what he has in his hand and ungrateful (to Allah). At the same time he is boastful towards others. Allah, the Exalted, then says,

﴿إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ صَبَرُواْ﴾
(Except those who show patience) meaning, those who show patience during times of hardship and adversity. In reference to Allah's statement,

﴿وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّـلِحَاتِ﴾
(and do righteous good deeds) This means that they perform the good deeds in times of ease and good health. Concerning the statement,

﴿أُوْلَـئِكَ لَهُمْ مَّغْفِرَةٌ﴾
(those, theirs will be forgiveness) meaning, that they will be forgiven due to the calamities that afflicted them. Concerning Allah's statement,

﴿وَأَجْرٌ كَبِيرٌ﴾
(and a great reward.) This great reward is due to them because of what they sent forth (of good deeds) in their times of ease. This is similar to what is mentioned in the Hadith,

«وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ لَا يُصِيبُ الْمُؤْمِنَ هَمٌّ وَلَا غَمٌّ وَلَا نَصَبٌ وَلَا وَصَبٌ وَلَا حَزَنٌ، حَتَّى الشَّوْكَةُ يُشَاكُهَا إِلَّا كَفَّرَ اللهُ عَنْهُ بِهَا مِنْ خَطَايَاه»
(By He in Whose Hand is my soul! No worry, calamity, distress, illness, or grief strikes a believer, even the prick of a thorn, except that Allah will expiate his sins for him because of it.) In the Sahih it is recorded that the Prophet said,

«وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ لَا يَقْضِي اللهُ لِلْمُؤْمِنِ قَضَاءً إِلَّا كَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، إِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ سَرَّاءُ فَشَكَرَ كَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، وَإِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ ضَرَّاءُ فَصَبَرَ كَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، وَلَيْسَ ذَلِكَ لِأَحَدٍ غَيْرِ الْمُؤْمِن»
(By He in Whose Hand is my soul! Allah does not decree any matter for the believer except that it is good for him. If any blessing befalls him, he is thankful (to Allah) and that is good for him. If any harm comes to him, he is patient and that is also good for him. This is (a bounty) exclusively for the believer.) For this reason, Allah, the Exalted, says,

﴿وَالْعَصْرِ - إِنَّ الإِنسَـنَ لَفِى خُسْرٍ - إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّـلِحَـتِ وَتَوَاصَوْاْ بِالْحَقِّ وَتَوَاصَوْاْ بِالصَّبْرِ ﴾
(By Al-`Asr (the time). Verily, man is in loss. Except those who believe and do righteous good deeds. And recommend one another to the truth and recommend one another to patience.) ﴿103:1-3﴾ Allah also says,

﴿إِنَّ الإِنسَـنَ خُلِقَ هَلُوعاً ﴾
(Verily, man was created very impatient.) ﴿70:19﴾