Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 11. Hud, Ayah 88

قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُ عَلَىٰ بَيِّنَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّي وَرَزَقَنِي مِنْهُ رِزْقًا حَسَنًا ۚ وَمَا أُرِيدُ أَنْ أُخَالِفَكُمْ إِلَىٰ مَا أَنْهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ ۚ إِنْ أُرِيدُ إِلَّا الْإِصْلَاحَ مَا اسْتَطَعْتُ ۚ وَمَا تَوْفِيقِي إِلَّا بِاللَّهِ ۚ عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَإِلَيْهِ أُنِيبُ٨٨
88. He said: "O my people! Tell me if I have a clear evidence from my Lord and He has given me a good sustenance from Himself (shall I corrupt it by mixing it with the unlawfully earned money). I wish not, in contradiction to you, to do that which I forbid you. I only desire reform to the best of my power. And my guidance cannot come except from Allah, in Him I put my trust and unto Him I repent.''

Shu`ayb's Refutation of His People

He said to them: Do you see O my people, that if I

﴿عَلَى بَيِّنَةٍ مِّن رَّبِّى﴾
(have a clear evidence from my Lord) meaning, upon clear guidance in that which I am calling to.

﴿وَرَزَقَنِى مِنْهُ رِزْقًا حَسَنًا﴾
(and He has given me a good sustenance from Himself.) It has been said that he meant the prophethood. It has also been said that he meant the lawful provisions. It seems that the verse carries both meanings. Ath-Thawri said,

﴿وَمَآ أُرِيدُ أَنْ أُخَالِفَكُمْ إِلَى مَآ أَنْهَـكُمْ عَنْهُ﴾
(I wish not, in contradiction to you, to do that which I forbid you.) meaning, `do not forbid you from something and at the same time I contradict my prohibitions in secret behind your backs, doing what I have forbidden.' This is similar to what Qatadah said concerning Allah's statement,

﴿وَمَآ أُرِيدُ أَنْ أُخَالِفَكُمْ إِلَى مَآ أَنْهَـكُمْ عَنْهُ﴾
(I wish not, in contradiction to you, to do that which I forbid you.) "He is saying, `I do not forbid you all from something while I do it myself.'''

﴿إِنْ أُرِيدُ إِلاَّ الإِصْلَـحَ مَا اسْتَطَعْتُ﴾
(I only desire reform to the best of my power.) This means, "In that which I command and forbid you, I only want to correct your affair as much as I am able.''

﴿وَمَا تَوْفِيقِى﴾
(And my guidance cannot come) This means, "In whatever I intend that agrees with the truth.''

﴿إِلاَّ بِاللَّهِ عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ﴾
(except from Allah, in Him I put my trust) This means in all of my affairs.

﴿وَإِلَيْهِ أُنِيبُ﴾
(and unto Him I repent.) meaning; "I return.'' This has been said by Mujahid and others.