Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 11. Hud, Ayaat 50 To 52

وَإِلَىٰ عَادٍ أَخَاهُمْ هُودًا ۚ قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرُهُ ۖ إِنْ أَنْتُمْ إِلَّا مُفْتَرُونَ٥٠يَا قَوْمِ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَى الَّذِي فَطَرَنِي ۚ أَفَلَا تَعْقِلُونَ٥١وَيَا قَوْمِ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ ثُمَّ تُوبُوا إِلَيْهِ يُرْسِلِ السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَارًا وَيَزِدْكُمْ قُوَّةً إِلَىٰ قُوَّتِكُمْ وَلَا تَتَوَلَّوْا مُجْرِمِينَ٥٢
50. And to the `Ad (people We sent) their brother Hud. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other god but Him. Certainly, you do nothing but invent lies! 51. "O my people I ask of you no reward for it (the Message). My reward is only from Him Who created me. Will you not then understand'' 52. "And O my people! Ask forgiveness of your Lord and then repent to Him, He will send you (from the sky) abundant rain, and add strength to your strength, so do not turn away as criminals.''

The Story of Prophet Hud and the People of `Ad

Allah, the Exalted, says,

﴿و﴾
(And) This is an introductory to what is implied: "Verily, We sent.''

﴿إِلَى عَادٍ أَخَاهُمْ هُودًا﴾
(to the `Ad (people) their brother Hud.) Hud came to them commanding them to worship Allah alone, without any associates. He forbade them from worshipping the idols which they made up, inventing names as gods. He informed them that he did not want any reward from them for his sincere advising and conveying of Allah's Message. He only sought his reward from Allah, the One Who created him.

﴿أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ﴾
(Will you not then understand) Someone has come calling you to what will benefit your situation in this life and the Hereafter without asking for any wage (from them). Then he commanded them to seek the forgiveness of the One Who is capable of expiating previous sins. He also commanded them to repent for that which they may do in the future. Whoever has these characteristics, Allah will make his sustenance easy for him, grant him ease in his affairs and guard over his situation. For this reason Allah says,

﴿يُرْسِلِ السَّمَآءَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَاراً ﴾
(He will send you (from the sky) abundant rain,)