Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 16. An-Nahl, Ayaat 126 To 128

وَإِنْ عَاقَبْتُمْ فَعَاقِبُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبْتُمْ بِهِ ۖ وَلَئِنْ صَبَرْتُمْ لَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لِلصَّابِرِينَ١٢٦وَاصْبِرْ وَمَا صَبْرُكَ إِلَّا بِاللَّهِ ۚ وَلَا تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا تَكُ فِي ضَيْقٍ مِمَّا يَمْكُرُونَ١٢٧إِنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ مُحْسِنُونَ١٢٨
126. And if you punish them, then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted. But if you have patience with them, then it is better for those who are patient. 127. And be patient, and your patience will not be, but by the help of Allah. And do not grieve over them, and do not be distressed by their plots. 128. Truly, Allah is with those who have Taqwa, and the doers of good.

The Command for Equality in Punishment

Allah commands justice in punishment and equity in settling the cases of rights. `Abdur-Razzaq recorded that, concerning the Ayah,

﴿فَعَاقِبُواْ بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبْتُمْ بِهِ﴾
(then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted.) Ibn Sirin said, "If a man among you takes something from you, then you should take something similar from him.'' This was also the opinion of Mujahid, Ibrahim, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, and others. Ibn Jarir also favored this opinion. Ibn Zayd said: "They had been commanded to forgive the idolators, then some men became Muslim who were strong and powerful. They said, `O Messenger of Allah, if only Allah would give us permission, we would sort out these dogs!' Then this Ayah was revealed, then it was latter abrogated by the command to engage in Jihad.''

﴿وَاصْبِرْ وَمَا صَبْرُكَ إِلاَّ بِاللَّهِ﴾
(And be patient, and your patience will not be but by the help of Allah.) This emphasizes the command to be patient and tells us that patience cannot be acquired except by the will, help, decree and power of Allah. Then Allah says:

﴿وَلاَ تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ﴾
(And do not grieve over them,) meaning, those who oppose you, for Allah has decreed that this should happen.

﴿وَلاَ تَكُ فِى ضَيْقٍ﴾
(and do not be distressed) means do not be worried or upset.

﴿مِّمَّا يَمْكُرُونَ﴾
(by their plots.) meaning; because of the efforts they are putting into opposing you and causing you harm, for Allah is protecting, helping, and supporting you, and He will cause you to prevail and defeat them.

﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ وَّالَّذِينَ هُم مُّحْسِنُونَ ﴾
(Truly, Allah is with those who have Taqwa, and the doers of good.) meaning; He is with them in the sense of supporting them, helping them and guiding them. This is a special kind of "being with'', as Allah says elsewhere:

﴿إِذْ يُوحِى رَبُّكَ إِلَى الْمَلَـئِكَةِ أَنِّي مَعَكُمْ فَثَبِّتُواْ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ﴾
((Remember) when your Lord revealed to the angels, "Verily, I am with you, so support those who believe.'') ﴿8:12﴾ And Allah said to Musa and Harun:

﴿لاَ تَخَافَآ إِنَّنِى مَعَكُمَآ أَسْمَعُ وَأَرَى﴾
(Fear not, verily I am with you both, hearing and seeing.) ﴿20:46﴾ The Prophet said to (Abu Bakr) As-Siddiq when they were in the cave:

«لَا تَحْزَنْ إِنَّ اللهَ مَعَنَا»
(Do not worry, Allah is with us.'') The general kind of "being with'' some one, or something is by means of seeing, hearing and knowing, as Allah says:

﴿وَهُوَ مَعَكُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنتُمْ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ﴾
(And He is with you wherever you may be. And Allah sees whatever you do.) ﴿57:4﴾

﴿أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِى السَّمَـوَتِ وَمَا فِى الاٌّرْضِ مَا يَكُونُ مِن نَّجْوَى ثَلَـثَةٍ إِلاَّ هُوَ رَابِعُهُمْ وَلاَ خَمْسَةٍ إِلاَّ هُوَ سَادِسُهُمْ وَلاَ أَدْنَى مِن ذَلِكَ وَلاَ أَكْثَرَ إِلاَّ هُوَ مَعَهُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كَانُواْ﴾
(Have you not seen that Allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth There is no secret counsel of three but He is their fourth, - nor of five but He is their sixth, - nor of less than that or more, but He is with them wherever they may be.) ﴿58:7﴾

﴿وَمَا تَكُونُ فِى شَأْنٍ وَمَا تَتْلُواْ مِنْهُ مِن قُرْءَانٍ وَلاَ تَعْمَلُونَ مِنْ عَمَلٍ إِلاَّ كُنَّا عَلَيْكُمْ شُهُودًا﴾
(You will not be in any circumstance, nor recite any portion of the Qur'an, nor having done any deeds, but We are witnessing you.) ﴿10:61﴾

﴿وَالَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ﴾
(those who have Taqwa) means, they keep away from that which is forbidden.

﴿وَّالَّذِينَ هُم مُّحْسِنُونَ﴾
(and the doers of good. ) meaning they do deeds of obedience to Allah. These are the ones whom Allah takes care of, He gives them support, and helps them to prevail over their enemies and opponents. This is end of the Tafsir of Surat An-Nahl. To Allah be praise and blessings, and peace and blessings be upon Muhammad and his family and Companions.