Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 16. An-Nahl, Ayaat 30 To 32

۞ وَقِيلَ لِلَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا مَاذَا أَنْزَلَ رَبُّكُمْ ۚ قَالُوا خَيْرًا ۗ لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا فِي هَٰذِهِ الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةٌ ۚ وَلَدَارُ الْآخِرَةِ خَيْرٌ ۚ وَلَنِعْمَ دَارُ الْمُتَّقِينَ٣٠جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ يَدْخُلُونَهَا تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ ۖ لَهُمْ فِيهَا مَا يَشَاءُونَ ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ يَجْزِي اللَّهُ الْمُتَّقِينَ٣١الَّذِينَ تَتَوَفَّاهُمُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ طَيِّبِينَ ۙ يَقُولُونَ سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكُمُ ادْخُلُوا الْجَنَّةَ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ٣٢
30. And (when) it is said to those who had Taqwa (piety and righteousness), ''What is it that your Lord has revealed'' They say: "That which is good.'' For those who do good in this world, there is good, and the home of the Hereafter will be better. And excellent indeed will be the home (i.e. Paradise) of those who have Taqwa. 31. `Adn (Eden) Paradise (Gardens of Eternity) which they will enter, under which rivers flow, in it they will have all that they wish. Thus Allah rewards those who have Taqwa. 32. Those whose lives the angels take while they are in a pious state saying (to them) "Salamun `Alaikum (peace be on you!). Enter Paradise because of what (good) you used to do (in the world).''

What the Pious say about the Revelation, their Reward and their Condition during and after Death

Here we are told about the blessed, as opposed to the doomed, who, when they are asked,

﴿مَّاذَآ أَنزَلَ رَبُّكُمْ﴾
(What is it that your Lord has revealed) they will reluctantly answer, "He did not reveal anything, these are just the fables of old.'' But the blessed, on the other hand, will say, "That which is good,'' meaning - He revealed something good, meaning mercy and blessings for those who followed it and believed in it. Then we are told about Allah's promise to His servants which He revealed to His Messengers. He says:

﴿لِّلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُواْ فِى هذِهِ الْدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةٌ﴾
(For those who do good in this world, there is good) This is like the Ayah,

﴿مَنْ عَمِلَ صَـلِحاً مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَى وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَوةً طَيِّبَةً وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُم بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ ﴾
(Whoever works righteousness - whether male or female - while being a true believer verily, to him We will give a good life, and We shall certainly reward them in proportion to the best of what they used to do.) (16:97), which means that whoever does good in this world, Allah will reward him for his good deeds in this world and in the next. Then we are told that the home of the Hereafter will be better, i.e., better than the life of this world, and that the reward in the Hereafter will be more complete than the reward in this life, as Allah says,

﴿وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْعِلْمَ وَيْلَكُمْ ثَوَابُ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ﴾
(But those who were given (religious) knowledge said: "Woe to you! The reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is better) ﴿28:80﴾ and,

﴿وَمَا عِندَ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ لِّلأَبْرَارِ﴾
(and what is with Allah for the righteous is better.) ﴿3:198﴾ and;

﴿وَالاٌّخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَى ﴾
(Although the Hereafter is better and enduring) (87:17). Allah said to His Messenger :

﴿وَلَلاٌّخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لَّكَ مِنَ الاٍّولَى ﴾
(And indeed the Hereafter is better for you than the present) (93:4). Then Allah describes the abode of the Hereafter, saying,

﴿وَلَنِعْمَ دَارُ الْمُتَّقِينَ﴾
(And excellent indeed will be the home (i.e. Paradise) of those who have Taqwa.)

﴿جَنَّـتِ عَدْنٍ﴾
(`Adn (Eden) Paradise (Gardens of Eternity)) refers to the home of the Muttaqun, i.e., in the Hereafter they will have Gardens of Eternity in which they will dwell forever.

﴿تَجْرِى مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَـرُ﴾
(under which rivers flow) meaning, between its trees and palaces.

﴿لَّهُمْ فِيهَا مَا يَشَآءُونَ﴾
(in it they will have all that they wish) this is like the Ayah:

﴿وَفِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِيهِ الاٌّنْفُسُ وَتَلَذُّ الاٌّعْيُنُ وَأَنتُمْ فِيهَا خَـلِدُونَ﴾
(in it (there will be) all that souls could desire, and all that eyes could delight in, and in it you will live forever.) ﴿43:71﴾

﴿كَذَلِكَ يَجْزِى اللَّهُ الْمُتَّقِينَ﴾
(Thus Allah rewards those who have Taqwa.) meaning, this is how Allah rewards everyone who believes in Him, fears Him, and does good deeds. Then Allah tells us about their condition when death approaches them in a good state, i.e., free from Shirk, impurity and all evil. The angels greet them and give them the good news of Paradise, as Allah says:

﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَـمُواْ تَتَنَزَّلُ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَلَـئِكَةُ أَلاَّ تَخَافُواْ وَلاَ تَحْزَنُواْ وَأَبْشِرُواْ بِالْجَنَّةِ الَّتِى كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ - نَحْنُ أَوْلِيَآؤُكُمْ فِى الْحَيَوةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِى الاٌّخِرَةِ وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِى أَنفُسُكُمْ وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَدَّعُونَ - نُزُلاً مِّنْ غَفُورٍ رَّحِيمٍ ﴾
(Verily, those who say: "Our Lord is Allah (alone),'' and then behave righteously, on them the angels will descend (at the time of their death) (saying): "Fear not, nor grieve! But receive the good news of Paradise as you have been promised! We have been your friends in the life of this world and are (so) in the Hereafter. In it you shall have (all) that your souls desire, and in it you shall have (all) that you ask for. An entertainment from (Allah), the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.'')(41:30:32) We have already referred to the Hadiths that have been reported on the taking of the soul of the believer and the soul of the disbeliever, when we discussed the Ayah,

﴿يُثَبِّتُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ بِالْقَوْلِ الثَّابِتِ فِى الْحَيَوةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِى الاٌّخِرَةِ وَيُضِلُّ اللَّهُ الظَّـلِمِينَ وَيَفْعَلُ اللَّهُ مَا يَشَآءُ ﴾
(Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word that stands firm in this world (i.e. they will keep on worshipping Allah Alone and none else), and in the Hereafter. And Allah will cause the wrongdoers to stray, and Allah does as He wills.) (14:27)