Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 39. Az-Zumar, Ayaat 60 To 61

وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تَرَى الَّذِينَ كَذَبُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ وُجُوهُهُمْ مُسْوَدَّةٌ ۚ أَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًى لِلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ٦٠وَيُنَجِّي اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا بِمَفَازَتِهِمْ لَا يَمَسُّهُمُ السُّوءُ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ٦١
60. And on the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied against Allah - their faces will be black. Is there not in Hell an abode for the arrogant 61. And Allah will deliver those who have Taqwa to their places of success. Evil shall touch them not, nor shall they grieve.

The Consequences for Those Who tell Lies against Allah and for Those Who have Taqwa

Allah tells us that on the Day of Resurrection, some faces will be blackened and some will be whitened. The faces of those who followed splits and divisions will be blackened, and the faces of Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jama`ah will be whitened. Allah says here:

﴿وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَـمَةِ تَرَى الَّذِينَ كَذَبُواْ عَلَى اللَّهِ﴾
(And on the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied against Allah) meaning, by their claims that He had partners or offspring.

﴿وُجُوهُهُم مُّسْوَدَّةٌ﴾
(their faces will be black.) means, because of their lies and fabrications.

﴿أَلَيْسَ فِى جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًى لِّلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ﴾
(Is there not in Hell an abode for the arrogant) means, is not Hell sufficient for them as a prison and humiliating final destination, because of their stubborn pride, arrogance and refusal to follow the truth

﴿وَيُنَجِّى اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْاْ بِمَفَازَتِهِمْ﴾
(And Allah will deliver those who are those who have Taqwa to their places of success.) means, because of what Allah has decreed for them of happiness and victory.

﴿لاَ يَمَسُّهُمُ السُّوءُ﴾
(Evil shall touch them not, ) means, on the Day of Resurrection.

﴿وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ﴾
(nor shall they grieve.) means, the greater terror (of that Day) will not cause them grief, for they will be safe from all grief and removed from all evil, and they will attain all that is good.