Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 39. Az-Zumar, Ayaat 10 To 12

قُلْ يَا عِبَادِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمْ ۚ لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا فِي هَٰذِهِ الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةٌ ۗ وَأَرْضُ اللَّهِ وَاسِعَةٌ ۗ إِنَّمَا يُوَفَّى الصَّابِرُونَ أَجْرَهُمْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ١٠قُلْ إِنِّي أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ اللَّهَ مُخْلِصًا لَهُ الدِّينَ١١وَأُمِرْتُ لِأَنْ أَكُونَ أَوَّلَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ١٢
10. Say: "O My servants who believe, have Taqwa of your Lord. Good is for those who do good in this world, and Allah's earth is spacious! Only those who are patient shall receive their reward in full, without reckoning.'' 11. Say: "Verily, I am commanded to worship Allah, making religion sincerely for Him.'' 12. "And I am commanded (this) in order that I may be the first of the Muslims

The Command for Taqwa, Emigration and to worship Him alone with all Sincerity

Allah commands His believing servants to remain steadfast in their obedience and have Taqwa of Him.

﴿قُلْ يعِبَادِ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ اتَّقُواْ رَبَّكُمْ لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُواْ فِى هَـذِهِ الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةٌ﴾
(Say: "O My servants who believe, have Taqwa of your Lord. Good is for those who do good in this world...'') means, the one who does good deeds in this world, will have a good (reward) in this world and in the Hereafter.

﴿وَأَرْضُ اللَّهِ وَاسِعَةٌ﴾
(and Allah's earth is spacious!) Mujahid said, "So emigrate through it and strive hard and keep away from idols.''

﴿إِنَّمَا يُوَفَّى الصَّـبِرُونَ أَجْرَهُمْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ﴾
(Only those who are patient shall receive their reward in full, without reckoning.) Al-`Awza`i said, "Their reward will not be weighed or measured; they will be given an immense reward.'' As-Suddi said:

﴿إِنَّمَا يُوَفَّى الصَّـبِرُونَ أَجْرَهُمْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ﴾
(Only those who are patient shall receive their reward in full, without reckoning.) means, "In Paradise.''

﴿قُلْ إِنِّى أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ اللَّهَ مُخْلِصاً لَّهُ الدِّينَ ﴾
(Say: "Verily, I am commanded to worship Allah, making religion sincerely for Him...'') means, `I am commanded to worship Allah alone in all sincerity, with no partner or associate.'

﴿وَأُمِرْتُ لاًّنْ أَكُونَ أَوَّلَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ ﴾
(And I am commanded (this) in order that I may be the first of the Muslims.)