Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 27. An-Naml, Ayaat 76 To 81

إِنَّ هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنَ يَقُصُّ عَلَىٰ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَكْثَرَ الَّذِي هُمْ فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ٧٦وَإِنَّهُ لَهُدًى وَرَحْمَةٌ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ٧٧إِنَّ رَبَّكَ يَقْضِي بَيْنَهُمْ بِحُكْمِهِ ۚ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْعَلِيمُ٧٨فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ ۖ إِنَّكَ عَلَى الْحَقِّ الْمُبِينِ٧٩إِنَّكَ لَا تُسْمِعُ الْمَوْتَىٰ وَلَا تُسْمِعُ الصُّمَّ الدُّعَاءَ إِذَا وَلَّوْا مُدْبِرِينَ٨٠وَمَا أَنْتَ بِهَادِي الْعُمْيِ عَنْ ضَلَالَتِهِمْ ۖ إِنْ تُسْمِعُ إِلَّا مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ مُسْلِمُونَ٨١

76. Verily, this Qur'an narrates to the Children of Israel most of that in which they differ. 77. And truly, it is a guide and a mercy for the believers. 78. Verily, your Lord will decide between them by His judgement. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing. 79. So, put your trust in Allah; surely, you are on manifest truth. 80. Verily, you cannot make the dead to hear nor can you make the deaf to hear the call, when they flee, turning their backs. 81. Nor can you lead the blind out of their error. You can only make to hear those who believe in Our Ayat, so they submit (became Muslims).

The Qur'an tells the Story of the Differences among the Children of Israel, and Allah judges between Them

Allah tells us about His Book and the guidance, proof and criterion between right and wrong that it contains. He tells us about the Children of Israel, who were the bearers of the Tawrah and Injil.

﴿أَكْثَرَ الَّذِى هُمْ فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ﴾
(most of that in which they differ.) such as their different opinions about `Isa. The Jews lied about him while the Christians exaggerated in praise for him, so the Qur'an came with the moderate word of truth and justice: that he was one of the servants of Allah, and one of His noble Prophets and Messengers, may the best of peace and blessings be upon him, as the Qur'an says:

﴿ذلِكَ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ قَوْلَ الْحَقِّ الَّذِى فِيهِ يَمْتُرُونَ ﴾
(Such is `Isa, son of Maryam. (It is) a statement of truth, about which they doubt) (19:34).

﴿وَإِنَّهُ لَهُدًى وَرَحْمَةٌ لِّلْمُؤمِنِينَ ﴾
(And truly, it is a guide and a mercy for the believers.) meaning, it is guidance for the hearts of those who believe in it, and a mercy to them. Then Allah says:

﴿إِن رَبَّكَ يَقْضِى بَيْنَهُم﴾
(Verily, your Lord will decide between them) meaning, on the Day of Resurrection,

﴿بِحُكْمِهِ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ﴾
(by His judgement. And He is the All-Mighty,) means, in His vengeance,

﴿الْعَلِيمُ﴾
(the All-Knowing.) Who knows all that His servants do and say.

The Command to put One's Trust in Allah and to convey the Message

﴿فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ﴾
(So, put your trust in Allah;) in all your affairs, and convey the Message of your Lord.

﴿إِنَّكَ عَلَى الْحَقِّ الْمُبِينِ﴾
(surely, you are on manifest truth.) meaning, you are following manifest truth, even though you are opposed by those who oppose you because they are doomed. The Word of your Lord has been justified against them, so that they will not believe even if all the signs are brought to them. Allah says:

﴿إِنَّكَ لاَ تُسْمِعُ الْمَوْتَى﴾
(Verily, you cannot make the dead to hear) meaning, you cannot cause them to hear anything that will benefit them. The same applies to those over whose hearts is a veil and in whose ears is deafness of disbelief. Allah says:

﴿وَلاَ تُسْمِعُ الصُّمَّ الدُّعَآءَ إِذَا وَلَّوْاْ مُدْبِرِينَ﴾
وَمَآ أَنتَ بِهَادِى الْعُمْىِ عَن ضَلَـلَتِهِمْ إِن تُسْمِعُ إِلاَّ مَن يُؤْمِنُ بِـئَايَـتِنَا فَهُم مُّسْلِمُونَ-﴾
(nor can you make the deaf to hear the call, when they flee, turning their backs. Nor can you lead the blind out of their error. You can only make to hear those who believe in Our Ayat, so they submit (became Muslims).) meaning, those who have hearing and insight will respond to you, those whose hearing and sight are of benefit to their hearts and who are humble towards Allah and to the Message that comes to them through the mouths of the Messengers, may peace be upon them.