Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 18. Al-Kahf, Ayaat 100 To 102

وَعَرَضْنَا جَهَنَّمَ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْكَافِرِينَ عَرْضًا١٠٠الَّذِينَ كَانَتْ أَعْيُنُهُمْ فِي غِطَاءٍ عَنْ ذِكْرِي وَكَانُوا لَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ سَمْعًا١٠١أَفَحَسِبَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنْ يَتَّخِذُوا عِبَادِي مِنْ دُونِي أَوْلِيَاءَ ۚ إِنَّا أَعْتَدْنَا جَهَنَّمَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ نُزُلًا١٠٢
100. And on that Day We shall present Hell to the disbelievers, plain to view. 101. (To) those whose eyes had been under a covering from My Reminder, and they could not bear to hear (it). 102. Do then those who disbelieved think that they can take My servants as Awliya' ﴿protectors﴾ besides Me Verily, We have prepared Hell as an entertainment for the disbelievers.

Hell will be displayed before the Disbelievers on the Day of Resurrection

Allah tells us what He will do to the disbelievers on the Day of Resurrection. He will show Hell to them, meaning He will bring it forth for them to see its punishment and torment before they enter it. This will intensify their distress and grief. In Sahih Muslim it is recorded that Ibn Mas`ud said, "The Messenger of Allah said,

«يُؤْتَى بِجَهَنَّمَ تُقَادُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ بِسَبْعِينَ أَلْفَ زِمَامٍ، مَعَ كُلِّ زِمَامٍ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ مَلَك»
(Hell will be brought forth on the Day of Resurrection, pulled by means of seventy thousand reins, each of which will be held by seventy thousand angels.) Then Allah says of them:

﴿الَّذِينَ كَانَتْ أَعْيُنُهُمْ فِى غِطَآءٍ عَن ذِكْرِى﴾
((To) those whose eyes had been under a covering from My Reminder,) meaning, they neglected it, turning a blind eye and a deaf ear to it, refusing to accept guidance and follow the truth. As Allah says:

﴿وَمَن يَعْشُ عَن ذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَـنِ نُقَيِّضْ لَهُ شَيْطَاناً فَهُوَ لَهُ قَرِينٌ ﴾
(And whosoever turns away blindly from the remembrance of the Most Gracious, We appoint for him a Shaytan to be a companion for him.) ﴿43:36﴾ And here Allah says:

﴿وَكَانُواْ لاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ سَمْعاً﴾
(and they could not bear to hear (it). ) meaning, they did not understand the commands and prohibitions of Allah. Then He says:

﴿أَفَحَسِبَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَن يَتَّخِذُواْ عِبَادِى مِن دُونِى أَوْلِيَآءَ﴾
(Do then those who disbelieved think that they can take My servants as Awliya' ﴿protectors﴾ besides Me) meaning, do they think that this is right for them and that it is going to benefit them

﴿كَلاَّ سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَـدَتِهِمْ وَيَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضِدّاً ﴾
(Nay, but they will deny their worship of them, and become opponents to them) ﴿19:82﴾. Allah says that He has prepared Hell as their abode on the Day of Resurrection.