Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 20. Ta-ha, Ayaat 9 To 10

وَهَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ مُوسَىٰ٩إِذْ رَأَىٰ نَارًا فَقَالَ لِأَهْلِهِ امْكُثُوا إِنِّي آنَسْتُ نَارًا لَعَلِّي آتِيكُمْ مِنْهَا بِقَبَسٍ أَوْ أَجِدُ عَلَى النَّارِ هُدًى١٠
9. And has there come to you the story of Musa 10. When he saw a fire, he said to his family: "Wait! Verily, I have seen a fire; perhaps I can bring you some burning brand therefrom, or find some guidance at the fire.''

A Discussion of the Message of Musa

From this point, Allah begins to mention the story of Musa, how revelation began to come to Him, and Allah's speaking directly to him. This occurred after Musa had completed the time agreed upon between he and his father-in-law that he would herd sheep. He was traveling with his family, and it has been said that he was headed for the land of Egypt, after having been away from it for more than ten years. He had his wife with him and he became lost on the way during a cold, wintery night. Therefore, he settled down, making a camp between some mountain passes and mountains that were covered with snow, sleet, dense clouds, darkness and fog. He began to try to make a fire with a kindling device he had with him, in order to produce some light, as was customary. However, it would not kindle anything and it even stopped giving off sparks. While he was in this condition, he saw a fire from the side of the mountain. It appeared to him to be a fire glowing from the right side of the mountain from where he was. He then announced the good news to his family saying,

﴿إِنِّى ءَانَسْتُ نَاراً لَّعَلِّى آتِيكُمْ مِّنْهَا بِقَبَسٍ﴾
(Verily, I have seen a fire; perhaps I can bring you some burning brand) This means a flame from a fire. In another Ayah he said,

﴿أَوْ جَذْوَةٍ مِّنَ النَّارِ﴾
(or a burning firebrand.) ﴿28:29﴾) This is a coal that has a burning flame.

﴿لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَصْطَلُونَ﴾
(that you may warm yourselves. ) ﴿28:29﴾ This proves that it was in fact cold weather at that time. Concerning his statement,

﴿بِقَبَسٍ﴾
(some burning brand) This proves that it was dark. In reference to his statement,

﴿أَوْ أَجِدُ عَلَى النَّارِ هُدًى﴾
(or find some guidance at the fire.) This means someone who can guide me to the road. This proves that he lost the road. This is as Ath-Thawri reported from Abu Sa`id Al-A`war, from `Ikrimah, from Ibn `Abbas that he said concerning Allah's statement,

﴿أَوْ أَجِدُ عَلَى النَّارِ هُدًى﴾
(or find some guidance at the fire.) "This means someone who will guide me to the road. They were cold and had lost their way. Then, when he (Musa) saw the fire he said, `Either I will find someone who can guide us to the road, or at least I can bring you all some fire that you can kindle with.' ''