Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 20. Ta-ha, Ayaat 105 To 108

وَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْجِبَالِ فَقُلْ يَنْسِفُهَا رَبِّي نَسْفًا١٠٥فَيَذَرُهَا قَاعًا صَفْصَفًا١٠٦لَا تَرَىٰ فِيهَا عِوَجًا وَلَا أَمْتًا١٠٧يَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَّبِعُونَ الدَّاعِيَ لَا عِوَجَ لَهُ ۖ وَخَشَعَتِ الْأَصْوَاتُ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ فَلَا تَسْمَعُ إِلَّا هَمْسًا١٠٨
105. And they ask you concerning the mountains. Say: "My Lord will blast them and scatter them as particles of dust.'' 106. "Then He shall leave it as a level smooth plain.'' 107. "You will see therein no crookedness nor curve.'' 108. On that Day mankind will follow strictly (the voice of) Allah's caller, no crookedness (that is without going to the right or left of that voice) will they show him (Allah's caller). And all voices will be humbled for the Most Gracious (Allah), and nothing shall you hear except Hamsa.

The destruction of the Mountains, and the Earth becomes a Smooth Plain

Allah says,

﴿وَيَسْـَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْجِبَالِ﴾
(And they ask you concerning the mountains.) This is a question, will they remain on the Day of Resurrection or will they cease to exist

﴿فَقُلْ يَنسِفُهَا رَبِّى نَسْفاً﴾
(Say: "My Lord will blast them and scatter them as particles of dust.'') This means that He will take them away from their places, wipe them out and remove them completely.

﴿فَيَذَرُهَا﴾
(Then He shall leave it) referring to the earth;

﴿قَاعاً صَفْصَفاً﴾
(as a level smooth plain.) This means one expanse spread out. The word Qa` means a piece of land that is level and the word Safsafa is used to place emphasis on this meaning. It has also been said that Safsafa means that which has no vegetation growing in it. The first meaning is preferred, even though the second meaning is also included by necessity. In reference to this, Allah says,

﴿لاَّ تَرَى فِيهَا عِوَجاً وَلا أَمْتاً ﴾
(You will see therein no crookedness nor curve. ) meaning, `on that Day you will not see in the earth any valley, hill, or any place, whether low or elevated.' Ibn `Abbas, `Ikrimah, Mujahid, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and others of the Salaf all said the same.

The People will rush towards the Voice of the Caller

﴿يَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَّبِعُونَ الدَّاعِىَ لاَ عِوَجَ لَهُ﴾
(On that Day mankind will follow strictly Allah's caller, no crookedness will they show him.) On the Day, they see these conditions and these frightening sights, they will hastily respond to the caller. Wherever they are commanded to go, they will rush to it. If they had been like this in the worldly life, it would have been more beneficial for them, but here it does not benefit them. This is as Allah says,

﴿أَسْمِعْ بِهِمْ وَأَبْصِرْ يَوْمَ يَأْتُونَنَا﴾
(How clearly will they see and hear, the Day when they will appear before Us!) ﴿19:38﴾ Allah also says,

﴿مُّهْطِعِينَ إِلَى الدَّاعِ﴾
(hastening towards the caller.) Concerning Allah's statement,

﴿وَخَشَعَتِ الأَصْوَاتُ لِلرَّحْمَـنِ﴾
(And all voices will be humbled for the Most Gracious,) Ibn `Abbas said, "This means they will be silent.'' As-Suddi also said the same.

﴿فَلاَ تَسْمَعُ إِلاَّ هَمْساً﴾
(And nothing shall you hear except Hamsa.) Sa`id bin Jubayr related that Ibn `Abbas said, "This means the steps of feet.'' `Ikrimah, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi` bin Anas, Qatadah, Ibn Zayd and others all said the same. `Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn `Abbas said,

﴿فَلاَ تَسْمَعُ إِلاَّ هَمْساً﴾
(And nothing shall you hear except Hamsa.) "Hamsa means a hidden voice.'' This has also been repor- ted from `Ikrimah and Ad-Dahhak. Sa`id bin Jubayr said,

﴿فَلاَ تَسْمَعُ إِلاَّ هَمْساً﴾
(And nothing shall you hear except Hamsa.) "Hamsa means the secret speech and the steps of feet.''