Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 30. Ar-Rum, Ayaat 46 To 47

وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ يُرْسِلَ الرِّيَاحَ مُبَشِّرَاتٍ وَلِيُذِيقَكُمْ مِنْ رَحْمَتِهِ وَلِتَجْرِيَ الْفُلْكُ بِأَمْرِهِ وَلِتَبْتَغُوا مِنْ فَضْلِهِ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ٤٦وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ رُسُلًا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِمْ فَجَاءُوهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَانْتَقَمْنَا مِنَ الَّذِينَ أَجْرَمُوا ۖ وَكَانَ حَقًّا عَلَيْنَا نَصْرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ٤٧
46. And among His signs is this that He sends the winds as glad tidings, giving you a taste of His mercy, and that the ships may sail at His command, and that you may seek of His bounty, in order that you may be thankful. 47. And indeed We did send Messengers before you to their own peoples. They came to them with clear proofs, then, We took vengeance on those who committed crimes; and it was incumbent upon Us to help the believers.

Among the Signs of Allah are the Winds

Here Allah mentions the favor He does for His creatures by sending winds to them, as harbingers of His mercy, meaning that they will be followed by rain. Allah says:

﴿وَلِيُذِيقَكُمْ مِّن رَّحْمَتِهِ﴾
(giving you a taste of His mercy,) that is, the rain which will come down and revive people and the land.

﴿وَلِتَجْرِىَ الْفُلْكُ بِأَمْرِهِ﴾
(and that the ships may sail at His command,) means, on the sea, for they are driven by the wind.

﴿وَلِتَبْتَغُواْ مِن فَضْلِهِ﴾
(and that you may seek of His bounty,) means, by trading, earning a living and traveling from one country to another, one region to another.

﴿وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ﴾
(in order that you may be thankful.) means, that you may give thanks to Allah for the innumerable favors He has done for you, both visible and hidden. Then Allah says:

﴿وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ رُسُلاً إِلَى قَوْمِهِمْ فَجَآءُوهُم بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَانتَقَمْنَا مِنَ الَّذِينَ أَجْرَمُواْ﴾
(And indeed We did send Messengers before you to their own peoples. They came to them with clear proofs, then, We took vengeance on those who committed crimes;) These are words of consolation from Allah to His servant and Messenger Muhammad . They tell him that if many of his people and of mankind disbelieve in him, the previous Messengers were also rejected, despite the clear signs that they brought, but Allah punished those who rejected and opposed them, and saved those who believed in them.

﴿وَكَانَ حَقّاً عَلَيْنَا نَصْرُ الْمُؤْمِنينَ﴾
(and it was incumbent upon Us to help the believers.) This is a duty which Allah took upon Himself as a blessing and a favor to them. This is like the Ayah,

﴿كَتَبَ رَبُّكُمْ عَلَى نَفْسِهِ الرَّحْمَةَ﴾
(your Lord has prescribed mercy for Himself) (6:54). Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Abu Ad-Darda', may Allah be pleased with him, said: "I heard Allah's Messenger saying:

«مَا مِنِ امْرِىءٍ مُسْلِمٍ يَرُدُّ عَنْ عِرْضِ أَخِيهِ إِلَّا كَانَ حَقًّا عَلَى اللهِ أَنْ يَرُدَّ عَنْهُ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَة»
(No Muslim man defends the honor of his brother except that there would be a right upon Allah to defend him from the fire of Hell on the Day of Resurrection.) Then he recited this Ayah:

﴿وَكَانَ حَقّاً عَلَيْنَا نَصْرُ الْمُؤْمِنينَ﴾
(and it was incumbent upon Us to help the believers.)''