Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 51. Az-Zariyat, Ayaat 47 To 51

وَالسَّمَاءَ بَنَيْنَاهَا بِأَيْدٍ وَإِنَّا لَمُوسِعُونَ٤٧وَالْأَرْضَ فَرَشْنَاهَا فَنِعْمَ الْمَاهِدُونَ٤٨وَمِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَا زَوْجَيْنِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ٤٩فَفِرُّوا إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ٥٠وَلَا تَجْعَلُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ٥١
47. With Hands We constructed the heaven. Verily, We are able to expand the vastness of space thereof. 48. And We have made the earth a Firash; how excellent spreader (thereof) are We! 49. And of everything We have created pairs, that you may remember. 50. So, flee to Allah. Verily, I am a plain warner to you from Him. 51. And set not up any other god along with Allah. Verily, I am a plain warner to you from Him.

Proofs of Allah's Oneness abound in the Creation of the Heavens and the Earth

Allah reminds us of the creating of the higher and lower worlds,

﴿وَالسَّمَآءَ بَنَيْنَـهَا﴾
(We constructed the heaven.) meaning, `We made it as a high roof, protected from falling,'

﴿بِأَيْدٍ﴾
(with Hands), meaning, with strength, according to `Abdullah bin `Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah, Ath-Thawri and several others,

﴿وَإِنَّا لَمُوسِعُونَ﴾
(Verily, We are able to extend the vastness of space thereof.) means, `We made it vast and We brought its roof higher without pillars to support it, and thus it is hanging independently.'

﴿وَالاٌّرْضَ فَرَشْنَـهَا﴾
(And We have made the earth a Firash), meaning, `We have made it a resting place for the created,'

﴿فَنِعْمَ الْمَـهِدُونَ﴾
(how excellent a spreader (thereof) are We!), meaning, `We spread it for its inhabitants,'

﴿وَمِن كُلِّ شَىْءٍ خَلَقْنَا زَوْجَيْنِ﴾
(And of everything We have created pairs,) meaning, all the created are in pairs, the heaven and earth, night and day, sun and moon, land and sea, light and darkness, faith and disbelief, death and life, misery and happiness, Paradise and Fire, in addition to the animals and plants. The statement of Allah the Exalted,

﴿لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ﴾
(that you may remem- ber.) and know that the Creator, Allah, is One without partners,

﴿فَفِرُّواْ إِلَى اللَّهِ﴾
(So, flee to Allah.) meaning, seek shelter with Him and trust in Him in all of your affairs,

﴿إِنِّى لَكُمْ مِّنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌوَلاَ تَجْعَلُواْ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَـهاً ءَاخَرَ﴾
(Verily, I am a plain warner to you from Him. And set not up any other god along with Allah.) do not associate any partners with Him,

﴿إِنِّى لَكُمْ مِّنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌ﴾
(Verily, I am a plain warner to you from Him.)