Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 9. At-Tauba, Ayaat 67 To 68

الْمُنَافِقُونَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتُ بَعْضُهُمْ مِنْ بَعْضٍ ۚ يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمُنْكَرِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَقْبِضُونَ أَيْدِيَهُمْ ۚ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَنَسِيَهُمْ ۗ إِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ٦٧وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتِ وَالْكُفَّارَ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۚ هِيَ حَسْبُهُمْ ۚ وَلَعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ ۖ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مُقِيمٌ٦٨
67. The hypocrites, men and women, are one from another; they enjoin evil, and forbid the good, and they close their hands. They have forgotten Allah, so He has forgotten them. Verily, the hypocrites are the rebellious. 68. Allah has promised the hypocrites -- men and women -- and the disbelievers, the fire of Hell; therein shall they abide. It will suffice them. Allah has cursed them and for them is the lasting torment.

Other Characteristics of Hypocrites

Allah admonishes the hypocrites who, unlike the believers, who enjoin righteousness and forbid evil,

﴿يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمُنكَرِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَقْبِضُونَ أَيْدِيَهُمْ﴾
(they enjoin evil, and forbid the good, and they close their hands), from spending in Allah's cause,

﴿نَسُواْ اللَّهَ﴾
(They have forgotten Allah), they have forgotten the remembrance of Allah,

﴿فَنَسِيَهُمْ﴾
(so He has forgotten them.), by treating them as if He has forgotten them. Allah also,

﴿وَقِيلَ الْيَوْمَ نَنسَاكُمْ كَمَا نَسِيتُمْ لِقَآءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَـذَا﴾
(And it will be said: "This Day We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours) ﴿45:34﴾. Allah said,

﴿إِنَّ الْمُنَـفِقِينَ هُمُ الْفَـسِقُونَ﴾
(Verily, the hypocrites are the rebellious) the rebellious from the way of truth who embrace the wicked way,

﴿وَعَدَ الله الْمُنَـفِقِينَ وَالْمُنَـفِقَاتِ وَالْكُفَّارَ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ﴾
(Allah has promised the hypocrites -- men and women -- and the disbelievers, the fire of Hell), on account of their evildoing mentioned here,

﴿خَـلِدِينَ فِيهَآ﴾
(therein shall they abide.), for eternity, they and the disbelievers,

﴿هِىَ حَسْبُهُمْ﴾
(It will suffice them.), as a torment,

﴿وَلَعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ﴾
(Allah has cursed them), He expelled and banished them ﴿from His mercy﴾,

﴿وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مُّقِيمٌ﴾
(and for them is the lasting torment.)