Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 9. At-Tauba, Ayaat 43 To 45

عَفَا اللَّهُ عَنْكَ لِمَ أَذِنْتَ لَهُمْ حَتَّىٰ يَتَبَيَّنَ لَكَ الَّذِينَ صَدَقُوا وَتَعْلَمَ الْكَاذِبِينَ٤٣لَا يَسْتَأْذِنُكَ الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ أَنْ يُجَاهِدُوا بِأَمْوَالِهِمْ وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِالْمُتَّقِينَ٤٤إِنَّمَا يَسْتَأْذِنُكَ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ وَارْتَابَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ فَهُمْ فِي رَيْبِهِمْ يَتَرَدَّدُونَ٤٥
43. May Allah forgive you. Why did you grant them leave, until those who told the truth were manifest to you, and you had known the liars 44. Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, would not ask your leave to be exempted from fighting with their properties and their lives; and Allah is the All-Knower of those who have Taqwa. 45. It is only those who believe not in Allah and the Last Day and whose hearts are in doubt that ask your leave. So in their doubts they waver.

Moderately criticizing the Prophet for allowing the Hypocrites to stay behind

Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that `Awn said, "Have you heard criticism softer than this, starting with forgiveness before criticism,

﴿عَفَا اللَّهُ عَنكَ لِمَ أَذِنتَ لَهُمْ﴾
(May Allah forgive you. Why did you grant them leave...)'' Muwarriq Al-`Ijli and others said similarly. Qatadah said, "Allah criticized him as you read here, then later revealed to him the permission to allow them to lag behind if he wants, in Surat An-Nur,

﴿فَإِذَا اسْتَـْذَنُوكَ لِبَعْضِ شَأْنِهِمْ فَأْذَن لِّمَن شِئْتَ مِنْهُمْ﴾
(So if they ask your permission for some affairs of theirs, give permission to whom you will of them) ﴿24:62﴾.'' `Ata' Al-Khurasani said similarly. Mujahid said, "This Ayah was revealed about some people who said, `Ask permission from the Messenger of Allah ﴿to stay behind﴾, and whether he agrees, or disagrees, remain behind!''' Allah said,

﴿حَتَّى يَتَبَيَّنَ لَكَ الَّذِينَ صَدَقُواْ﴾
(...until those who told the truth were manifest to you), in reference to valid excuses,

﴿وَتَعْلَمَ الْكَـذِبِينَ﴾
(and you had known the liars) Allah says, `Why did you not refuse to give them permission to remain behind when they asked you, so that you know those who truly obey you and the liars, who were intent on remaining behind even if you do not give them permission to do so, Allah asserts that none who believe in Allah and His Messenger seek his permission to remain behind from fighting,

﴿لاَ يَسْتَأْذِنُكَ﴾
(would not ask your leave), to stay behind from Jihad,

﴿الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الاٌّخِرِ أَن يُجَـهِدُواْ بِأَمْوَلِهِمْ وَأَنفُسِهِمْ﴾
(Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, to be exempted from fighting with their properties and their lives.) because they consider Jihad an act of worship. This is why when Allah called them to perform Jihad, they obeyed and hasten to act in His obedience,

﴿وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِالْمُتَّقِينَإِنَّمَا يَسْتَأْذِنُكَ﴾
(and Allah is the All-Knower of those who have Taqwa. Those who ask your leave), to remain behind, without a valid excuse,

﴿الَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الاٌّخِرِ﴾
(those who believe not in Allah and the Last Day), they do not hope for Allah's reward in the Hereafter for their good actions,

﴿وَارْتَابَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ﴾
(and whose hearts are in doubt), about the validity of what you brought them,

﴿فَهُمْ فِى رَيْبِهِمْ يَتَرَدَّدُونَ﴾
(so in their doubts they waver.) They waver in doubt, taking one step forward and one step back. They do not have a firm stance in anything, for they are unsure and destroyed, neither belonging to these nor to those. Verily, those whom Allah misguides, will never find a way for themselves to guidance.