Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 34. Saba, Ayah 46

۞ قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَعِظُكُمْ بِوَاحِدَةٍ ۖ أَنْ تَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ مَثْنَىٰ وَفُرَادَىٰ ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُوا ۚ مَا بِصَاحِبِكُمْ مِنْ جِنَّةٍ ۚ إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ لَكُمْ بَيْنَ يَدَيْ عَذَابٍ شَدِيدٍ٤٦
46. Say: "I exhort you to one (thing) only, that you stand up for Allah's sake in pairs and singly, and reflect, there is no madness in your companion. He is only a warner to you in face of a severe torment.''

Refutation of Their Accusation that the Prophet was Insane

Allah says: `Say, O Muhammad, to these disbelievers who claim that you are crazy,'

﴿إِنَّمَآ أَعِظُكُمْ بِوَحِدَةٍ﴾
I exhort you to one (thing) only, meaning, I am only telling you to one thing, and that is:

﴿أَن تَقُومُواْ لِلَّهِ مَثْنَى وَفُرَادَى ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُواْ مَا بِصَـحِبِكُمْ مِّن جِنَّةٍ﴾
that you stand up for Alla0h s sake in pairs and singly, and reflect, there is no madness in your companion. meaning, `stand sincerely before Allah, without being influenced by your own desires or tribal feelings, and ask one another, is Muhammad crazy Advise one another,'

﴿ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُواْ﴾
and reflect means, let each person look within himself concerning the matter of Muhلammad , and ask other people about him if he is still confused, then let him think about the matter. Alla0h says:

﴿أَن تَقُومُواْ لِلَّهِ مَثْنَى وَفُرَادَى ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُواْ مَا بِصَـحِبِكُمْ مِّن جِنَّةٍ﴾
(that you stand up for Allah's sake in pairs and singly, and reflect, there is no madness in your companion.) This meaning was stated by Mujahid, Muhammad bin Ka`b, As-Suddi, Qatadah and others. This is what is meant by the Ayah.

﴿إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ نَذِيرٌ لَّكُمْ بَيْنَ يَدَىْ عَذَابٍ شَدِيدٍ﴾
(He is only a warner to you in face of a severe torment.) Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn `Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, commented on this Ayah: "One day, the Prophet climbed up As-Safa' and shouted,

«يَا صَبَاحَاه»
(O people!) The Quraysh gathered around him, and said, `What is the matter with you' He said,

«أَرَأَيْتُمْ لَوْ أَخْبَرْتُكُمْ أَنَّ الْعَدُوَّ يُصَبِّحُكُمْ أَوْ يُمَسِّيكُمْ أَمَا كُنْتُمْ تُصَدِّقُونِّي»
(What do you think If I told you that the enemy were approaching and will reach us in the morning or in the evening, would you believe me) They said, `Of course.' He said:

«فَإِنِّي نَذِيرٌ لَكُمْ بَيْنَ يَدَيْ عَذَابٍ شَدِيد»
(I am a warner to you in the face of a severe punishment.) Abu Lahab said, `May you perish! You have called us together only to tell us this' Then Allah revealed:

﴿تَبَّتْ يَدَآ أَبِى لَهَبٍ وَتَبَّ ﴾
(Perish the two hands of Abu Lahab and perish he!) (111:1) We have already discussed this in our Tafsir of the Ayah:

﴿وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الاٌّقْرَبِينَ ﴾
(And warn your tribe of near kindred) (26:214).