Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 29. Al-Ankabut, Ayaat 28 To 30

وَلُوطًا إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ إِنَّكُمْ لَتَأْتُونَ الْفَاحِشَةَ مَا سَبَقَكُمْ بِهَا مِنْ أَحَدٍ مِنَ الْعَالَمِينَ٢٨أَئِنَّكُمْ لَتَأْتُونَ الرِّجَالَ وَتَقْطَعُونَ السَّبِيلَ وَتَأْتُونَ فِي نَادِيكُمُ الْمُنْكَرَ ۖ فَمَا كَانَ جَوَابَ قَوْمِهِ إِلَّا أَنْ قَالُوا ائْتِنَا بِعَذَابِ اللَّهِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ٢٩قَالَ رَبِّ انْصُرْنِي عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْمُفْسِدِينَ٣٠
28. And (remember) Lut, when he said to his people: "You commit immoral sins which none has preceded you in (committing) it in all creatures.'' 29. "Verily, you practice sodomy with men, and rob the wayfarer! And practice Al-Munkar in your meetings.'' But his people gave no answer except that they said: "Bring Allah's torment upon us if you are one of the truthful.'' 30. He said: "My Lord! Give me victory over the people who are corrupt.''

The preaching of Lut and what happened between Him and His People

Allah tells us that His Prophet Lut, peace be upon him, denounced his people for their evil deed and their immoral actions in having intercourse with males, a deed which none of the sons of Adam had ever committed before them. As well as doing this, they also disbelieved in Allah and rejected and opposed His Messenger, they robbed wayfarers, they would lie in wait on the road, kill people and loot their possessions.

﴿وَتَأْتُونَ فِى نَادِيكُمُ الْمُنْكَرَ﴾
(And practice Al-Munkar in your meetings.) This means, `in your gatherings you do and say things that are not befitting, and you do not denounce one another for doing such things.' Some said that they used to have intercourse with one another in public; this was the view of Mujahid. Some said that they used to compete in passing gas and laughing. This was the view of `A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, and Al-Qasim. Some of them said that they used to make rams fight one another, or organize cockfights. They used to do all of these things, and they were even eviler than that.

﴿فَمَا كَانَ جَوَابَ قَوْمِهِ إِلاَّ أَن قَالُواْ ائْتِنَا بِعَذَابِ اللَّهِ إِن كُنتَ مِنَ الصَّـدِقِينَ﴾
(But his people gave no answer except that they said: "Bring Allah's torment upon us if you are one of the truthful.'') This is indicative of their disbelief, scornful attitude and stubbornness. So Allah's Prophet asked for help against them, and said:

﴿رَبِّ انصُرْنِى عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْمُفْسِدِينَ﴾
(My Lord! Give me victory over the people who are corrupt.)