Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 29. Al-Ankabut, Ayaat 36 To 37

وَإِلَىٰ مَدْيَنَ أَخَاهُمْ شُعَيْبًا فَقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَارْجُوا الْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ وَلَا تَعْثَوْا فِي الْأَرْضِ مُفْسِدِينَ٣٦فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الرَّجْفَةُ فَأَصْبَحُوا فِي دَارِهِمْ جَاثِمِينَ٣٧
36. And to Madyan, We sent their brother Shu`ayb. He said: "O my people! Worship Allah and hope for the last Day, and commit no mischief on the earth as mischief-makers.'' 37. And they denied him; so the earthquake seized them, and they lay, prostrate in their dwellings.

Shu`ayb and His People

Allah tells us that His servant and Messenger Shu`ayb, peace be upon him, warned his people, the people of Madyan, and commanded them to worship Allah Alone with no partner or associate, and to fear the wrath and punishment of Allah on the Day of Resurrection. He said:

﴿يقَوْمِ اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ وَارْجُواْ الْيَوْمَ الاٌّخِرَ﴾
(O my people! Worship Allah and hope for the last Day,) Ibn Jarir said: "Some of them said that this meant: Fear the Last Day.'' This is like the Ayah,

﴿لِّمَن كَانَ يَرْجُو اللَّهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الاٌّخِرَ﴾
(for those who look forward to (meeting with) Allah and the Last Day) (60:6).

﴿وَلاَ تَعْثَوْاْ فِى الاٌّرْضِ مُفْسِدِينَ﴾
(and commit no mischief on the earth as mischief-makers.) This is forbidding them to make mischief on earth by spreading corruption, which means going around doing evil to people. They used to cheat in weights and measures, and ambush people on the road; this is in addition to their disbelief in Allah and His Messenger. So Allah destroyed them with a mighty earthquake that convulsed their land, and the Sayhah (shout) which tore their hearts from their bodies, and the torment of the Day of Shade, when their souls were taken. This was the torment of a great day. We have already examined their story in detail in Surat Al-A`raf, Surat Hud and Surat Ash-Shu`ara'.

﴿فَأَصْبَحُواْ فِي دَارِهِمْ جَـثِمِينَ﴾
(and they lay, prostrate in their dwellings.) Qatadah said, "They were dead.'' Others said that they were thrown on top of one another.