Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 37. As-Saffat, Ayaat 11 To 19

فَاسْتَفْتِهِمْ أَهُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقًا أَمْ مَنْ خَلَقْنَا ۚ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُمْ مِنْ طِينٍ لَازِبٍ١١بَلْ عَجِبْتَ وَيَسْخَرُونَ١٢وَإِذَا ذُكِّرُوا لَا يَذْكُرُونَ١٣وَإِذَا رَأَوْا آيَةً يَسْتَسْخِرُونَ١٤وَقَالُوا إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ١٥أَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا وَعِظَامًا أَإِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ١٦أَوَآبَاؤُنَا الْأَوَّلُونَ١٧قُلْ نَعَمْ وَأَنْتُمْ دَاخِرُونَ١٨فَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ فَإِذَا هُمْ يَنْظُرُونَ١٩
11.Then ask them: Are they harder to create, or those whom We have created Verily, We created them of a sticky clay. 12. Nay, you wondered while they mock. 13. And when they are reminded, they pay no attention. 14. And when they see an Ayah (a sign) from Allah, they mock at it. 15. And they say: This is nothing but evident magic! 16. "When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we verily be resurrected'' 17. And also our fathers of old 18. Say : "Yes, and you shall then be humiliated. 19. It will be a single Zajrah, and behold, they will be staring!

The Certainty of Life after Death

Allah says: `Ask these people, those who deny the resurrection, which is harder to create Are they more difficult to create or the heavens, the earth, the angels, devils, the mighty creatures -- everything in between them' Ibn Mas`ud said that they admitted that these things were harder to create than they were. If this is the case, then why do they deny the resurrection, when they see things that are greater than that which they deny As Allah says:

﴿لَخَلْقُ السَّمَـوَتِ وَالاٌّرْضِ أَكْـبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ وَلَـكِنَّ أَكْـثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ ﴾
(The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind; yet, most of mankind know not) (40:57) Then Allah explains that they were created from something weak, as He says:

﴿إِنَّا خَلَقْنَـهُم مِّن طِينٍ لاَّزِبٍ﴾
(Verily, We created them of a sticky clay.) Mujahid, Sa`id bin Jubayr and Ad-Dahhak said, "This is the useful kind of mud which sticks to itself.'' Ibn `Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and `Ikrimah said, "It is sticky and useful.'' Qatadah said, "It is that which sticks to the hand.''

﴿بَلْ عَجِبْتَ وَيَسْخُرُونَ ﴾
(Nay, you wondered while they mock.) means, `you were astounded, O Muhammad, at these people who denied the resurrection whilst you were certain that it is true, when they disbelieved in what Allah told you of this wondrous matter, which is the re-creation of their bodies after they have disintegrated. They oppose what you say because of their intense disbelief and they make fun of what you tell them about that.' Qatadah said, "Muhammad was astounded by the mockery of the misguided ones among the sons of Adam.''

﴿وَإِذَا رَأَوْاْ ءَايَةً﴾
(And when they see an Ayah) means, clear evidence and proof,

﴿يَسْتَسْخِرُونَ﴾
(they mock at it.) Mujahid and Qatadah said, "They make fun of it.''

﴿وَقَالُواْ إِن هَـذَآ إِلاَّ سِحْرٌ مُّبِينٌ ﴾
(And they say: "This is nothing but evident magic!'') means, `this that you have brought is nothing but plain magic.'

﴿أَءِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَاباً وَعِظَـماً أَءِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ - أَوَ ءَابَآؤُنَا الاٌّوَّلُونَ ﴾
(When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we (then) verily be resurrected And also our fathers of old) They thought that this was unlikely to happen, and they did not believe it.

﴿قُلْ نَعَمْ وَأَنتُمْ دَخِرُونَ ﴾
(Say: "Yes, and you shall then be humiliated''.) means, `tell them, O Muhammad: Yes, you will be raised up on the Day of Resurrection, after you have become dust and bones, and you will be humiliated,' i.e., put to shame before His great might. This is like the Ayat:

﴿وَكُلٌّ أَتَوْهُ دَخِرِينَ﴾
(And all shall come to Him, humbled) (27:87), and

﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِى سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَخِرِينَ﴾
(Verily, those who scorn My worship, they will surely enter Hell in humiliation!) (40:60) Then Allah says:

﴿فَإِنَّمَا هِىَ زَجْرَةٌ وَحِدَةٌ فَإِذَا هُمْ يَنظُرُونَ ﴾
(It will be a single Zajrah, and behold, they will be staring!) means, it will be a single command from Allah, He will call them once to come forth from the earth, then they will be standing before Him, staring at the horrors of the Day of Resurrection. And Allah knows best.