Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 37. As-Saffat, Ayaat 149 To 160

فَاسْتَفْتِهِمْ أَلِرَبِّكَ الْبَنَاتُ وَلَهُمُ الْبَنُونَ١٤٩أَمْ خَلَقْنَا الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِنَاثًا وَهُمْ شَاهِدُونَ١٥٠أَلَا إِنَّهُمْ مِنْ إِفْكِهِمْ لَيَقُولُونَ١٥١وَلَدَ اللَّهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ١٥٢أَصْطَفَى الْبَنَاتِ عَلَى الْبَنِينَ١٥٣مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ١٥٤أَفَلَا تَذَكَّرُونَ١٥٥أَمْ لَكُمْ سُلْطَانٌ مُبِينٌ١٥٦فَأْتُوا بِكِتَابِكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ١٥٧وَجَعَلُوا بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ الْجِنَّةِ نَسَبًا ۚ وَلَقَدْ عَلِمَتِ الْجِنَّةُ إِنَّهُمْ لَمُحْضَرُونَ١٥٨سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ١٥٩إِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ١٦٠
149. Now ask them: "Are there (only) daughters for your Lord and sons for them'' 150. Or did We create the angels female while they were witnesses 151. Verily, it is of their falsehood that they say: 152. "Allah has begotten.'' And, verily, they are liars! 153. Has He (then) chosen daughters rather than sons 154. What is the matter with you How do you decide 155. Will you not then remember 156. Or is there for you a plain authority 157. Then bring your Book if you are truthful! 158. And they have invented a kinship between Him and the Jinn, but the Jinn know well that they have indeed to appear (before Him). 159. Glorified be Allah! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him! 160. Except the servants of Allah, whom He chooses.

Refutation of Those Who attribute Children to Allah and say that the Angels are His Daughters

Allah denounces those idolators who attribute daughters to Allah -- exalted be He above that -- and attributed to themselves what they desired, i.e., they wanted male offspring to themselves.

﴿وَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُمْ بِالاٍّنْثَى ظَلَّ وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدًّا وَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ ﴾
(And when the news of (the birth of) a female (child) is brought to any of them, his face becomes dark, and he is filled with inward grief!) (16:58), i.e., that upsets him, and he would only choose sons for himself. Allah says: `Then how can they attribute to Allah the share that they would not choose for themselves' Allah says:

﴿فَاسْتَفْتِهِمْ﴾
(Now ask them) means, quiz them by way of denunciation,

﴿أَلِرَبِّكَ الْبَنَاتُ وَلَهُمُ الْبَنُونَ﴾
(Are there (only) daughters for your Lord and sons for them) This is like the Ayah:

﴿أَلَكُمُ الذَّكَرُ وَلَهُ الاٍّنثَى - تِلْكَ إِذاً قِسْمَةٌ ضِيزَى ﴾
(Is it for you the males and for Him the females That indeed is a division most unfair!) (53:21-22).

﴿أَمْ خَلَقْنَا الْمَلَـئِكَةَ إِنَـثاً وَهُمْ شَـهِدُونَ ﴾
(Or did We create the angels female while they were witnesses) means, how did they decide that the angels are female when they did not witness their creation This is like the Ayah:

﴿وَجَعَلُواْ الْمَلَـئِكَةَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ عِبَادُ الرَّحْمَـنِ إِنَـثاً أَشَهِدُواْ خَلْقَهُمْ سَتُكْتَبُ شَهَـدَتُهُمْ وَيُسْـَلُونَ ﴾
(And they make the angels females who themselves are servants of the Most Gracious. Did they witness their creation Their testimony will be recorded, and they will be questioned!) (43:19), which means, they will be questioned about that on the Day of Resurrection.

﴿أَلاَ إِنَّهُم مِّنْ إِفْكِهِمْ﴾
(Verily, it is of their falsehood) means, it is a part of the lies they tell.

﴿لَيَقُولُونَوَلَدَ اللَّهُ﴾
(that they say: "Allah has begotten.'') meaning, that offspring have been born to Him.

﴿وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَـذِبُونَ﴾
(And verily, they are liars!) Allah mentions three of the things they said about the angels, which formed the utmost disbelief and falsehood. They said that they were the daughters of Allah and that Allah had offspring -- exalted and sanctified be He above that. Then they made these offspring female, then they worshipped them instead of Allah, exalted and sanctified be He -- any of which on its own would be sufficient to condemn them to spend eternity in Hell. Then Allah says, denouncing them:

﴿أَصْطَفَى الْبَنَاتِ عَلَى الْبَنِينَ ﴾
(Has He (then) chosen daughters rather than sons) meaning, what would make Him choose daughters rather than sons This is like the Ayah,

﴿أَفَأَصْفَـكُمْ رَبُّكُم بِالْبَنِينَ وَاتَّخَذَ مِنَ الْمَلَـئِكَةِ إِنَاثًا إِنَّكُمْ لَتَقُولُونَ قَوْلاً عَظِيمًا ﴾
(Has then your Lord preferred for you sons, and taken for Himself from among the angels daughters Verily, you indeed utter an awful saying.) (17:40) Allah says:

﴿مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ ﴾
(What is the matter with you How do you decide) meaning, `what kind of reasoning makes you say that'

﴿أَفَلاَ تَذَكَّرُونَ - أَمْ لَكُمْ سُلْطَـنٌ مُّبِينٌ ﴾
(Will you not then remember Or is there for you a plain authority) means, `evidence to prove what you say.'

﴿فَأْتُواْ بِكِتَـبِكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ صَـدِقِينَ ﴾
(Then bring your Book if you are truthful!) means, `produce evidence for that derived from a Book revealed from heaven by Allah, to prove that He has taken what you say (i.e., offspring). What you say is totally irrational.'

﴿وَجَعَلُواْ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ الْجِنَّةِ نَسَباً﴾
(And they have invented a kinship between Him and the Jinn,) Mujahid said, "The idolators said that the angels were the daughters of Allah. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, `Then who are their mothers' They said, `The daughters of the leaders of the Jinn.''' Qatadah and Ibn Zayd also said this. Allah -- may He be blessed and exalted -- says:

﴿وَلَقَدْ عَلِمَتِ الجِنَّةُ﴾
(but the jinn know) meaning, those to whom this is attributed

﴿إِنَّهُمْ لَمُحْضَرُونَ﴾
(know well that they have indeed to appear (before Him).) means, that those who say that will be brought forth for punishment on the Day of Reckoning, because of the lies and falsehood that they uttered without knowledge.

﴿سُبْحَـنَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ ﴾
(Glorified be Allah! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him!) means, exalted, sanctified and glorified be He far above having any offspring and far above what the wrongdoers and heretics attribute to Him.

﴿إِلاَّ عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ ﴾
(Except the servants of Allah, whom He chooses.) The pronoun in the verb translated as "they attribute'' refers to all of mankind, then He excludes those whom He chooses, who are the ones who follow the truth revealed to every Prophet who was sent.

﴿فَإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ - مَآ أَنتُمْ عَلَيْهِ بِفَـتِنِينَ - إِلاَّ مَنْ هُوَ صَالِ الْجَحِيمِ - وَمَا مِنَّآ إِلاَّ لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَّعْلُومٌ - وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الصَّآفُّونَ - وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الْمُسَبِّحُونَ - وَإِن كَانُواْ لَيَقُولُونَ - لَوْ أَنَّ عِندَنَا ذِكْراً مِّنَ الاٌّوَّلِينَ ﴾