Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 37. As-Saffat, Ayaat 83 To 87

۞ وَإِنَّ مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ لَإِبْرَاهِيمَ٨٣إِذْ جَاءَ رَبَّهُ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ٨٤إِذْ قَالَ لِأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَاذَا تَعْبُدُونَ٨٥أَئِفْكًا آلِهَةً دُونَ اللَّهِ تُرِيدُونَ٨٦فَمَا ظَنُّكُمْ بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ٨٧
83. And verily, among those who followed his way was Ibrahim. 84. When he came to his Lord with a Salim heart. 85. When he said to his father and to his people: "What is it that which you worship'' 86. "Is it a falsehood -- gods other than Allah -- that you desire'' 87. "Then what think you about the Lord of the all that exists''

The Story of Ibrahim and His People

`Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn `Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him:

﴿وَإِنَّ مِن شِيعَتِهِ لإِبْرَهِيمَ ﴾
(And verily, among those who followed his ways was Ibrahim.) means, he was one of the followers of his religion. Mujahid said, "He was following his path and his way.''

﴿إِذْ جَآءَ رَبَّهُ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ ﴾
(When he came to his Lord with a Salim heart.) Ibn `Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, "This means that he bore witness that none has the right to be worshipped except Allah.'' rIbn Abi Hatim recorded that `Awf said, "I said to Muhammad bin Sirin, `What is the Salim heart' He said, `One which knows that Allah is true and that the Hour will undoubtedly come to pass, and that Allah will resurrect those who are in the graves.''' Al-Hasan said, "One that is free from Shirk.'' `Urwah said, "One that is not cursed.''

﴿إِذْ قَالَ لاًّبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَاذَا تَعْبُدُونَ ﴾
(When he said to his father and to his people: "What is it that which you worship'') He denounced his people for their worship of idols and false gods, Allah said:

﴿أَءِفْكاً ءَالِهَةً دُونَ اللَّهِ تُرِيدُونَ - فَمَا ظَنُّكُم بِرَبِّ الْعَـلَمِينَ ﴾
(Is it a falsehood -- gods other than Allah -- that you desire Then what think you about the Lord of the all that exists) Qatadah said, "This means, `what do you think He will do with you when you meet Him, given that you worshipped others alongside Him''