Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 21. Al-Anbiyaa, Ayaat 71 To 75

وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَلُوطًا إِلَى الْأَرْضِ الَّتِي بَارَكْنَا فِيهَا لِلْعَالَمِينَ٧١وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ نَافِلَةً ۖ وَكُلًّا جَعَلْنَا صَالِحِينَ٧٢وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْهِمْ فِعْلَ الْخَيْرَاتِ وَإِقَامَ الصَّلَاةِ وَإِيتَاءَ الزَّكَاةِ ۖ وَكَانُوا لَنَا عَابِدِينَ٧٣وَلُوطًا آتَيْنَاهُ حُكْمًا وَعِلْمًا وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ مِنَ الْقَرْيَةِ الَّتِي كَانَتْ تَعْمَلُ الْخَبَائِثَ ۗ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْمَ سَوْءٍ فَاسِقِينَ٧٤وَأَدْخَلْنَاهُ فِي رَحْمَتِنَا ۖ إِنَّهُ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ٧٥
71. And We rescued him and Lut to the land which We have blessed for the nations. 72. And We bestowed upon him Ishaq, and Ya`qub Nafilatan. Each one We made righteous. 73. And We made them leaders, guiding by Our command, and We revealed to them the doing of good deeds, performing Salah, and the giving of Zakah, and of Us (Alone) they were the worshippers. 74. And (remember) Lut, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and We saved him from the town who practised Al-Khaba'ith. Verily, they were a people given to evil, and were rebellious. 75. And We admitted him to Our mercy; truly, he was of the righteous.

The Migration of Ibrahim to Ash-Sham (Greater Syria), accompanied by Lut

Allah tells us that He saved Ibrahim from the fire lit by his people, and brought him out from among them, migrating to the land of Ash-Sham, to the sacred regions thereof.

﴿وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَـقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ نَافِلَةً﴾
(And We bestowed upon him Ishaq, and Ya`qub Nafilatan.) `Ata' and Mujahid said, "Nafilatan means as a gift.'' Ibn `Abbas, Qatadah and Al-Hakam bin `Uyaynah said, "The gift of a son who has a son,'' meaning that Ya`qub was the son of Ishaq, as Allah says:

﴿فَبَشَّرْنَـهَا بِإِسْحَـقَ وَمِن وَرَآءِ إِسْحَـقَ يَعْقُوبَ﴾
(But We gave her glad tidings of Ishaq, and after Ishaq, of Ya`qub) ﴿11:71﴾. `Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, "He asked for one ﴿son﴾, and said,

﴿رَبِّ هَبْ لِى مِنَ الصَّـلِحِينِ ﴾
("My Lord! Grant me from the righteous.'') So Allah gave him Ishaq, and gave him Ya`qub in addition.

﴿وَكُلاًّ جَعَلْنَا صَـلِحِينَ﴾
(Each one We made righteous. ) means, both of them were good and righteous people.

﴿وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً﴾
(And We made them leaders,) means, examples to be followed.

﴿يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا﴾
(guiding by Our command,) inviting to Him by His leave. Allah says:

﴿وَأَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَيْهِمْ فِعْلَ الْخَيْرَتِ وَإِقَامَ الصَّلوة وَإِيتَآءَ الزَّكَـوةِ﴾
(and We revealed to them the doing of good deeds, performing Salah, and the giving of Zakah,) Here the general is followed by the specific.

﴿وَكَانُواْ لَنَا عَـبِدِينَ﴾
(and of Us (Alone) they were the worshippers.) means, they did what they enjoined others to do.

The Prophet Lut

Then Allah mentions Lut, whose full name was Lut bin Haran bin Azar. He believed in Ibrahim and followed him, and migrated with him, as Allah says:

﴿فَـَامَنَ لَهُ لُوطٌ وَقَالَ إِنِّى مُهَاجِرٌ إِلَى رَبِّى﴾
(So Lut believed in him. He (Ibrahim) said: "I will emigrate for the sake of my Lord'') ﴿29:26﴾. Allah gave him wisdom and knowledge; He sent Revelation to him, made him a Prophet and appointed him to Sadum (Sodom) and its vicinity, but they rejected him and resisted him, so Allah utterly destroyed them, as He tells us in several places in His Book. Allah says;

﴿وَلُوطاً آتَيْنَـهُ حُكْماً وَعِلْماً وَنَجَّيْنَـهُ مِنَ الْقَرْيَةِ الَّتِى كَانَت تَّعْمَلُ الْخَبَـئِثَ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ قَوْمَ سَوْءٍ فَـسِقِينَ - وَأَدْخَلْنَـهُ فِى رَحْمَتِنَآ إِنَّهُ مِنَ الصَّـلِحِينَ ﴾
(and We saved him from the town who practised Al-Khaba'ith. Verily, they were a people given to evil, and were rebellious. And We admitted him to Our mercy; truly, he was of the righteous.)