Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 15. Al-Hijr, Ayaat 73 To 77

فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ مُشْرِقِينَ٧٣فَجَعَلْنَا عَالِيَهَا سَافِلَهَا وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حِجَارَةً مِنْ سِجِّيلٍ٧٤إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ٧٥وَإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيلٍ مُقِيمٍ٧٦إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ٧٧
73. So the Sayhah overtook them at the time of sunrise. 74. And We turned them upside down and rained stones of baked clay upon them. 75. Surely, in this are signs for those who see. 76. And verily, they were right on the highroad. 77. Surely, there is indeed a sign in that for the believers.

The Destruction of the People of Lut

Allah said;

﴿فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ﴾
(So the Sayhah overtook them) This is the piercing sound that came to them when the sun rose, which was accompanied by the city being flipped upside down, and stones of baked clay (As-Sijjil) raining down upon them. The discussion of As-Sijjil in Surah Hud is a sufficient explanation. Allah said:

﴿إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لآيَـتٍ لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ ﴾
(Surely, in this are signs for those who see.) meaning that the traces of the destruction of that city are easily visible to any one who ponder about it, whether they look at it with physical eyesight or mental and spiritual insight, as Mujahid said concerning the phrase,

﴿لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ﴾
(those who see) he said, "those who have insight and discernment.'' It was reported from Ibn `Abbas and Ad-Dahhak that it referred to those who look. Qatadah said: "those who learn lessons''.

﴿لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ﴾
(those who see) therefore the meaning is "those who ponder''.

The City of Sodom on the Highroad

﴿وَإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيلٍ مُّقِيمٍ ﴾
(And verily, they were right on the highroad.) meaning that the city of Sodom, which was physically and spiritually turned upside down, and pelted with stones until it became a foul smelling lake (the Dead Sea), is on a route that is easily accessible until the present day. This is like the Ayah,

﴿وَإِنَّكُمْ لَّتَمُرُّونَ عَلَيْهِمْ مُّصْبِحِينَ - وَبِالَّيْلِ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ ﴾
(Verily, you pass by them in the morning, and at night. Will you not then reflect) (37:137-138).

﴿إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لآيَةً لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ ﴾
(Surely, there is indeed a sign in that for the believers.) meaning, `All that We did to the people of Lut, from the destruction and the vengeance, to how We saved Lut and his family, these are clear signs to those who believe in Allah and His Messengers.'