Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 15. Al-Hijr, Ayaat 51 To 56

وَنَبِّئْهُمْ عَنْ ضَيْفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ٥١إِذْ دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَقَالُوا سَلَامًا قَالَ إِنَّا مِنْكُمْ وَجِلُونَ٥٢قَالُوا لَا تَوْجَلْ إِنَّا نُبَشِّرُكَ بِغُلَامٍ عَلِيمٍ٥٣قَالَ أَبَشَّرْتُمُونِي عَلَىٰ أَنْ مَسَّنِيَ الْكِبَرُ فَبِمَ تُبَشِّرُونَ٥٤قَالُوا بَشَّرْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ فَلَا تَكُنْ مِنَ الْقَانِطِينَ٥٥قَالَ وَمَنْ يَقْنَطُ مِنْ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّهِ إِلَّا الضَّالُّونَ٥٦
51. And tell them about the guests (i. e., the angels) of Ibrahim. 52. When they entered upon him, and said: "Salaman (peace!).'' He said: "Indeed we are frightened of you.'' 53. They said: "Do not be afraid! We bring you the good news of a boy possessing much knowledge and wisdom.'' 54. He said: "Do you give me this good news while old age has overtaken me Of what then is your news about'' 55. They said: "We give you good news in truth. So do not be of those who despair.'' 56. He said: "And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord except those who are astray''

The Guests of Ibrahim and their Good News of a Son for Him

Allah is saying: `Tell them, O Muhammad, about the story of

﴿ضَيْفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ﴾
(the guests of Ibrahim.)'

﴿دَخَلُواْ عَلَيْهِ فَقَالُواْ سَلامًا قَالَ إِنَّا مِنْكُمْ وَجِلُونَ﴾
(they entered upon him, and said: "Salaman (peace!).'' He said: "Indeed we are frightened of you.'') meaning that they were scared. The reason for their fear has been mentioned previously, which is that they noticed that these guests did not eat of the food that was offered, which was a fattened calf.

﴿قَالُواْ لاَ تَوْجَلْ﴾
(They said: "Do not be afraid!...'') meaning, do not be scared.

﴿وَبَشَّرُوهُ بِغُلَـمٍ عَلَيمٍ﴾
(We bring you the good news of a boy possessing much knowledge and wisdom.) this refers to Ishaq, as was previously mentioned in Surat Hud. Then

﴿قَالَ﴾
(He said) meaning he spoke with wonder and astonishment, asking for confirmation, because he was old and his wife was old:

﴿أَبَشَّرْتُمُونِى عَلَى أَن مَّسَّنِىَ الْكِبَرُ فَبِمَ تُبَشِّرُونَ﴾
(Do you give me this good news while old age has overtaken me Of what then is your news about) They responded by confirming the good news they had brought, good news after good news:

﴿قَالُواْ بَشَّرْنَـكَ بِالْحَقِّ فَلاَ تَكُن مِّنَ الْقَـنِطِينَ ﴾
(They said: "We give you good news in truth. So do not be of those who despair.'')