Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 50. Qaf, Ayaat 1 To 5

ق ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ الْمَجِيدِ١بَلْ عَجِبُوا أَنْ جَاءَهُمْ مُنْذِرٌ مِنْهُمْ فَقَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا شَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ٢أَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا ۖ ذَٰلِكَ رَجْعٌ بَعِيدٌ٣قَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا تَنْقُصُ الْأَرْضُ مِنْهُمْ ۖ وَعِنْدَنَا كِتَابٌ حَفِيظٌ٤بَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِالْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ فَهُمْ فِي أَمْرٍ مَرِيجٍ٥
1. Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an. 2. Nay, they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves. So the disbelievers say: "This is a strange thing!'' 3. "When we are dead and have become dust. (Shall we be resurrected) That is a far return.'' 4. We know that which the earth takes of them, and with Us is a Book preserved. 5. Nay, but they have denied the truth when it has come to them, so they are in a Marij state.

﴿ق﴾
(Qaf.) which is one of the letters of the alphabet that are mentioned in the beginning of some Surahs, such as,

﴿ص﴾
(Sad.) (38:1)

﴿ن﴾
(Nun. ) (68:1)

﴿الم ﴾
(Alif Lam Mim.) (2:1),

﴿حـم ﴾
(Ha Mim.) (40:1), and

﴿طس﴾
(Ta Sin) (28:1) and etc., Mujahid and several others said this. We also discussed this in the beginning of the explanation of Surat Al-Baqarah, and therefore, it is not necessary to repeat it here.

The Disbelievers wonder at the Message and Resurrection Allah said,

﴿وَالْقُرْءَانِ الْمَجِيدِ﴾
(By the Glorious Qur'an.) means by the Honorable and Great Qur'an, which,

﴿لاَّ يَأْتِيهِ الْبَـطِلُ مِن بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلاَ مِنْ خَلْفِهِ تَنزِيلٌ مِّنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ ﴾
(Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it: (it is) sent down by the All-Wise, Worthy of all praise.)(41:42) The subject of the oath contained in this Ayah is specified afterwards, even though it does not appear by word, emphasizing prophethood, resurrection and affirming that they are true. There are similar kinds of oaths in the Qur'an, whose subject is included in the meaning but not by word, such as,

﴿ص وَالْقُرْءَانِ ذِى الذِّكْرِ - بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فِى عِزَّةٍ وَشِقَاقٍ ﴾
(Sad. By the Qur'an full of reminding. Nay, those who disbelieve are in false pride and opposition.)(38:1-2) Allah said here,

﴿ق وَالْقُرْءَانِ الْمَجِيدِ - بَلْ عَجِبُواْ أَن جَآءَهُمْ مُّنذِرٌ مِّنْهُمْ فَقَالَ الْكَـفِرُونَ هَـذَا شَىْءٌ عَجِيبٌ ﴾
(Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an. Nay, they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves. So the disbelievers say: "This is a strange thing!'') They wondered at the wisdom behind sending a Messenger who is a human being. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said in another Ayah

﴿أَكَانَ لِلنَّاسِ عَجَبًا أَنْ أَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَى رَجُلٍ مِّنْهُمْ أَنْ أَنذِرِ النَّاسَ﴾
(Is it a wonder for mankind that We have sent Our revelation to a man from among themselves (saying): "Warn mankind.'') (10:2), meaning, this is not strange, for Allah chooses Messengers from angels and humans. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored mentioned that the disbelievers also wondered about the Resurrection and discounted its coming,

﴿أَءِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَاباً ذَلِكَ رَجْعُ بَعِيدٌ ﴾
(When we are dead and have become dust. That is a far return.) They said, `after we die, disintegrate, with our organs torn apart and we become dust, how can we be brought back to our original shape and bodies,'

﴿ذَلِكَ رَجْعُ بَعِيدٌ﴾
(That is a far return.) `it is not likely that it will ever occur.' They thought that Resurrection was far from happening and will never occur. Allah the Exalted responded to their statement by saying,

﴿قَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا تَنقُصُ الاٌّرْضَ مِنْهُمْ﴾
(We know that which the earth takes of them.) meaning, `We know what the earth consumes of their dead bodies.' Where and how the bodies disintegrated, what they turned into and how they have become, all of this is never absent from Allah's knowledge.

﴿وَعِندَنَا كِتَـبٌ حَفِيظٌ﴾
(and with Us is a Book preserved,) `that keeps all records. Therefore, Our knowledge is encompassing and the Book of decrees has everything precisely recorded in it. Al-`Awfi narrated that `Abdullah bin `Abbas commented on the statement of Allah the Exalted,

﴿قَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا تَنقُصُ الاٌّرْضَ مِنْهُمْ﴾
(We know that which the earth takes of them,) "It refers to what the earth consumes of their flesh, skin, bones and hair.'' A similar view was recorded from Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and several others. Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored, explained the reason behind their disbelief, rebellion and discounting the possibility of what is truly possible,

﴿بَلْ كَذَّبُواْ بِالْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَآءَهُمْ فَهُمْ فِى أَمْرٍ مَّرِيجٍ ﴾
(Nay, but they have denied the truth when it has come to them, so they are in a Marij state.) This is the state of all those who defy the Truth: whatever they say and utter after denying the Truth, is utterly false. Marij means, in disarray, in a confused state and defying the characteristics of the Truth. Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,

﴿إِنَّكُمْ لَفِى قَوْلٍ مُّخْتَلِفٍ - يُؤْفَكُ عَنْهُ مَنْ أُفِكَ ﴾
(Certainly, you have different ideas. Turned aside therefrom is he who is turned aside.)(51:8-9)