Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 69. Al-Haqqa, Ayaat 25 To 37

وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِشِمَالِهِ فَيَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي لَمْ أُوتَ كِتَابِيَهْ٢٥وَلَمْ أَدْرِ مَا حِسَابِيَهْ٢٦يَا لَيْتَهَا كَانَتِ الْقَاضِيَةَ٢٧مَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنِّي مَالِيَهْ ۜ٢٨هَلَكَ عَنِّي سُلْطَانِيَهْ٢٩خُذُوهُ فَغُلُّوهُ٣٠ثُمَّ الْجَحِيمَ صَلُّوهُ٣١ثُمَّ فِي سِلْسِلَةٍ ذَرْعُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعًا فَاسْلُكُوهُ٣٢إِنَّهُ كَانَ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ الْعَظِيمِ٣٣وَلَا يَحُضُّ عَلَىٰ طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ٣٤فَلَيْسَ لَهُ الْيَوْمَ هَاهُنَا حَمِيمٌ٣٥وَلَا طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِنْ غِسْلِينٍ٣٦لَا يَأْكُلُهُ إِلَّا الْخَاطِئُونَ٣٧
25. But as for him who will be given his Record in his left hand, will say: "I wish that I had not been given my Record!'' h26. "And that I had never known how my account is!'' 27. "Would that it had been my end!'' 28. "My wealth has not availed me;'' 29. "My power has gone from me!'' 30. (It will be said): "Seize him and fetter him;'' 31. "Then throw him in the blazing Fire.'' 32. "Then fasten him on a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits!'' 33. Verily, he used not to believe in Allah, the Most Great, 34. And urged not the feeding of the poor. 35. So, no friend has he here this Day, 36. Nor any food except filth from Ghislin. 37. None will eat it except the Khati'un.

The Bad Condition of Whoever is given His Record in His Left Hand

These Ayat inform about the condition of the wretched people when one of them is given his Record (of deeds) in his left hand when the people are brought before Allah. At this time he will be very remorseful.

﴿وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِىَ كِتَـبَهُ بِشِمَالِهِ فَيَقُولُ يلَيْتَنِى لَمْ أُوتَ كِتَـبِيَهْ - وَلَمْ أَدْرِ مَا حِسَابِيَهْ - يلَيْتَهَا كَانَتِ الْقَاضِيَةَ ﴾
((He) will say: "I wish that I had not been given my Record! And that I had never known how my account is! Would that it had been my end!...'') Ad-Dahhak said, "Meaning a death which is not followed by any life.'' Likewise said Muhammad bin Ka`b, Ar-Rabi` and As-Suddi. Qatadah said, "He will hope for death even though in the worldly life it was the most hated thing to him.''

﴿مَآ أَغْنَى عَنِّى مَالِيَهْ - هَلَكَ عَنِّى سُلْطَـنِيَهْ ﴾
(My wealth has not availed me; my power has gone from me.) means, `my wealth and my honor did not protect me from the punishment of Allah and His torment. Now the matter has ended with me alone and I have no helper nor anyone to save me.' At this Allah says,

﴿خُذُوهُ فَغُلُّوهُ - ثُمَّ الْجَحِيمَ صَلُّوهُ ﴾
(Seize him and fetter him; then throw him in the blazing Fire.) meaning, He will command the guardians of Hell to forcibly remove him from the gathering place, fetter him - meaning put iron collars on his neck - then carry him off to Hell and cast him into it, meaning they will submerge him in it. Allah said,

﴿ثُمَّ فِى سِلْسِلَةٍ ذَرْعُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعاً فَاْسْلُكُوهُ ﴾
(Then fasten him on a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits!) Ka`b Al-Ahbar said, "Every ring of it will be equal to the entire amount of iron found in this world.'' Al-`Awfi reported that Ibn `Abbas and Ibn Jurayj both said, "Each cubit will be the forearm's length of an angel.'' Ibn Jurayj reported that Ibn `Abbas said,

﴿فَاْسْلُكُوهُ﴾
(Then fasten him) "It will be entered into his buttocks and pulled out of his mouth. Then they will be arranged on this (chain) just like locusts are arranged on a stick that is being roasted.'' Al-`Awfi reported from Ibn `Abbas that he said, "It will be ran into his behind until it is brought out of his two nostrils so he will not be able to stand on his two feet.'' Imam Ahmad recorded from `Abdullah bin `Amr that the Messenger of Allah said,

«لَوْ أَنَّ رَصَاصَةً مِثْلَ هذِهِ وأشار إلى جُمْجُمَةٍ أُرْسِلَتْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ، وَهِيَ مَسِيرَةُ خَمْسِمِائَةِ سَنَةٍ، لَبَلَغَتِ الْأَرْضَ قَبْلَ اللَّيْلِ وَلَوْ أَنَّهَا أُرْسِلَتْ مِنْ رَأْسِ السِّلْسِلَةِ لَسَارَتْ أَرْبَعِينَ خَرِيفًا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَبْلُغَ قَعْرَهَا أَوْ أَصْلَهَا»
(If a drop of lead like this - and he pointed to a skull bone - were sent from the heaven to the earth, and it is a distance of five hundred years travel, it would reach the earth before night. And if it (the same drop of lead) were sent from the head of the chain (of Hell), it would travel forty fall seasons, night and day, before it would reach its (Hell's) cavity or base.) At-Tirmidhi also recorded this Hadith and he said, "This Hadith is Hasan.'' Concerning Allah's statement,

﴿إِنَّهُ كَانَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ الْعَظِيمِ - وَلاَ يَحُضُّ عَلَى طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ ﴾
(Verily, he used not to believe in Allah, the Most Great, and urged not on the feeding of the poor.) meaning, he did not establish the right of Allah upon him, of obedience to Him and performing His worship. He also did not benefit Allah's creation nor did he give them their rights. For verily, Allah has a right upon the servants that they worship Him alone and not associate anything with Him. The servants of Allah also have a right upon each other to good treatment and assistance in righteousness and piety. For this reason, Allah commanded performance of the prayer and the payment of Zakah. When the Prophet was (in his last moments) near death he said,

«الصَّلَاةَ وَمَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُم»
(The prayer (As-Salah) and your right hand possessions (i.e., slaves).) Allah says,

﴿فَلَيْسَ لَهُ الْيَوْمَ هَـهُنَا حَمِيمٌ - وَلاَ طَعَامٌ إِلاَّ مِنْ غِسْلِينٍ - لاَّ يَأْكُلُهُ إِلاَّ الْخَـطِئُونَ ﴾
(So no friend has he here this Day. Nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds. None will eat it except the Khati'un.) meaning, there is no one today who can save him from the punishment of Allah, nor any close friend or intercessor whose request would be honored. He will have no food here except for the filthy washing of wounds. Qatadah said, "It will be the worst food of the people of the Hellfire.'' Ar-Rabi` and Ad-Dahhak both said, "It (Ghislin) is a tree in Hell.'' Shabib bin Bishr reported from `Ikrimah that Ibn `Abbas said, `Ghislin will be the blood and fluid that will flow from their flesh.'' `Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn `Abbas that he said, `Ghislin is the pus of the people of the Hellfire.''