Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 35. Fatir, Ayaat 33 To 35

جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ يَدْخُلُونَهَا يُحَلَّوْنَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ وَلُؤْلُؤًا ۖ وَلِبَاسُهُمْ فِيهَا حَرِيرٌ٣٣وَقَالُوا الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي أَذْهَبَ عَنَّا الْحَزَنَ ۖ إِنَّ رَبَّنَا لَغَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ٣٤الَّذِي أَحَلَّنَا دَارَ الْمُقَامَةِ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ لَا يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا نَصَبٌ وَلَا يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا لُغُوبٌ٣٥
33. `Adn (Gardens) will they enter, therein will they be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments therein will be of silk. 34. And they will say: "All praise and thanks be to Allah, Who has removed from us (all) grief. Verily, our Lord is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate.'' 35. "Who, out of His grace, has lodged us in a home that will last forever, where toil will touch us not nor weariness will touch us.'') Allah tells us that those whom He chose among His servants, those who inherited the Book which was revealed from the Lord of the worlds, will, on the Day of Resurrection, have an abode in Everlasting Gardens which they will enter on the Day when they are raised anew and meet Allah.

﴿يُحَلَّوْنَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ مِن ذَهَبٍ وَلُؤْلُؤاً﴾
(therein will they be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls,) It was recorded in the Sahih from Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah said:

«تَبْلُغُ الْحِلْيَةُ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِ حَيْثُ يَبْلُغُ الْوَضُوء»
(The ornaments of the believer will reach as far as his Wudu'.)

﴿وَلِبَاسُهُمْ فِيهَا حَرِيرٌ﴾
(and their garments therein will be of silk.) For this reason it is forbidden for them (the males) in this world, but Allah will permit it for them in the Hereafter. It was recorded in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah said:

«مَنْ لَبِسَ الْحَرِيرَ فِي الدُّنْيَا لَمْ يَلْبَسْهُ فِي الْاخِرَة»
(Whoever wears silk in this world, will not wear it in the Hereafter.) And he said:

«هِيَ لَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا، وَلَكُمْ فِي الْاخِرَة»
(It is for them in this world, and for you in the Hereafter.)

﴿وَقَالُواْ الْحَمْدُ للَّهِ الَّذِى أَذْهَبَ عَنَّا الْحَزَنَ﴾
(And they will say: "All the praises and thanks be to Allah, Who has removed from us (all) grief...'') which means fear of everything that is feared; it has been lifted from us and we have been relieved of all that we used to fear of the anxieties of the world and the Hereafter. Ibn `Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and others said, "He forgives them for their major sins, and appreciates even the smallest of their good deeds.''

﴿الَّذِى أَحَلَّنَا دَارَ الْمُقَامَةِ مِن فَضْلِهِ﴾
(Who, out of His grace, has lodged us in a home that will last forever,) means, `Who has given us this position and status out of His grace and blessing and mercy, for our good deeds are not equivalent to this.' It was reported in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah said: -

«لَنْ يُدْخِلَ أَحَدًا مِنْكُمْ عَمَلُهُ الْجَنَّة»
(None of you will enter Paradise by virtue of his good deeds.) They said, "Not even you, O Messenger of Allah'' He said,

«وَلَا أَنَا إِلَّا أَنْ يَتَغَمَّدَنِي اللهُ تَعَالَى بِرَحْمَةٍ مِنْهُ وَفَضْل»
(Not even me, unless Allah encompasses me with His mercy and grace.)

﴿لاَ يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا نَصَبٌ وَلاَ يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا لُغُوبٌ﴾
(where toil will touch us not nor weariness will touch us.) means, neither hardship nor exhaustion will touch us. The words translated here as "toil'' and "weariness'' both mean exhaustion, as if what is meant by the negation of both is that neither their bodies nor their souls will become exhausted; and Allah knows best. They used to exhaust themselves in worshipping this world, but their obligations will come to an end when they enter Paradise, where they will enjoy eternal rest and repose. Allah says:

﴿كُلُواْ وَاشْرَبُواْ هَنِيئَاً بِمَآ أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِى الاٌّيَّامِ الْخَالِيَةِ ﴾
(Eat and drink at ease for that which you have sent on before you in days past!) (69:24)