Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 28. Al-Qasas, Ayaat 29 To 32

۞ فَلَمَّا قَضَىٰ مُوسَى الْأَجَلَ وَسَارَ بِأَهْلِهِ آنَسَ مِنْ جَانِبِ الطُّورِ نَارًا قَالَ لِأَهْلِهِ امْكُثُوا إِنِّي آنَسْتُ نَارًا لَعَلِّي آتِيكُمْ مِنْهَا بِخَبَرٍ أَوْ جَذْوَةٍ مِنَ النَّارِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَصْطَلُونَ٢٩فَلَمَّا أَتَاهَا نُودِيَ مِنْ شَاطِئِ الْوَادِ الْأَيْمَنِ فِي الْبُقْعَةِ الْمُبَارَكَةِ مِنَ الشَّجَرَةِ أَنْ يَا مُوسَىٰ إِنِّي أَنَا اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ٣٠وَأَنْ أَلْقِ عَصَاكَ ۖ فَلَمَّا رَآهَا تَهْتَزُّ كَأَنَّهَا جَانٌّ وَلَّىٰ مُدْبِرًا وَلَمْ يُعَقِّبْ ۚ يَا مُوسَىٰ أَقْبِلْ وَلَا تَخَفْ ۖ إِنَّكَ مِنَ الْآمِنِينَ٣١اسْلُكْ يَدَكَ فِي جَيْبِكَ تَخْرُجْ بَيْضَاءَ مِنْ غَيْرِ سُوءٍ وَاضْمُمْ إِلَيْكَ جَنَاحَكَ مِنَ الرَّهْبِ ۖ فَذَانِكَ بُرْهَانَانِ مِنْ رَبِّكَ إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلَئِهِ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْمًا فَاسِقِينَ٣٢
29. Then, when Musa had fulfilled the term, and was traveling with his family, he saw a fire in the direction of At-Tur. He said to his family: "Wait, I have seen a fire; perhaps I may bring to you from there some information, or a burning firebrand that you may warm yourselves.'' 30. So when he reached it, he was called from the right side of the valley, in the blessed place, from the tree: "O Musa! Verily, I am Allah, the Lord of all that exists!'' 31. "And throw your stick!'' But when he saw it moving as if it were a snake, he turned in flight, and looked not back. (It was said:) "O Musa! Draw near, and fear not. Verily, you are of those who are secure.'' 32. "Put your hand into the opening of your garment, it will come forth white without a disease; and draw your hand close to your side to be free from the fear. These are two proofs from your Lord to Fir`awn and his chiefs. Verily, they are the people who are rebellious.''

Musa's Return to Egypt and how he was honored with the Mission and Miracles on the Way

In the explanation of the previous Ayah, we have already seen that Musa completed the longer and better of the two terms, which may also be understood from the Ayah where Allah says:

﴿فَلَمَّا قَضَى مُوسَى الاٌّجَلَ﴾
(Then, when Musa had fulfilled the term,) meaning, the longer of the two; and Allah knows best.

﴿وَسَارَ بِأَهْلِهِ﴾
(and was traveling with his family,) They said: "Musa missed his country and his relatives, so he resolved to visit them in secret, without Fir`awn and his people knowing. So he gathered up his family and the flocks which his father-in-law had given to him, and set out on a cold, dark, rainy night. They stopped to camp, and whenever he tried to start a fire, he did not succeed. He was surprised by this, and while he was in this state,

﴿ءَانَسَ مِن جَانِبِ الطُّورِ نَاراً﴾
(he saw a fire in the direction of At-Tur) he saw a fire burning from a far.

﴿فَقَالَ لاًّهْلِهِ امْكُثُواْ إِنِّى ءَانَسْتُ نَاراً﴾
(He said to his family: "Wait, I have seen a fire...'') meaning, `wait while I go there, '

﴿لَّعَلِّى ءَاتِيكُمْ مِّنْهَا بِخَبَرٍ﴾
(perhaps I may bring to you from there some information,) This was because they lost their way.

﴿أَوْ جَذْوَةٍ مِّنَ النَّارِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَصْطَلُونَ﴾
(or a burning firebrand that you may warm yourselves.) so that they could get warm and find relief from the cold.

﴿فَلَمَّآ أَتَـهَا نُودِىَ مِن شَاطِىءِ الْوَادِى الأَيْمَنِ﴾
(So when he reached it (the fire), he was called from the right side of the valley,) From the side of the valley that adjoined the mountain on his right, to the west. This is like the Ayah,

﴿وَمَا كُنتَ بِجَانِبِ الْغَرْبِىِّ إِذْ قَضَيْنَآ إِلَى مُوسَى الاٌّمْرَ﴾
(And you were not on the western side, when We made clear to Musa the commandment) (20:44). This indicates that when Musa headed for the fire, he headed in the direction of the Qiblah with the western mountain on his right. He found the fire burning in a green bush on the side of the mountain adjoining the valley, and he stood there amazed at what he was seeing. Then his Lord called him:

﴿مِن شَاطِىءِ الْوَادِى الأَيْمَنِ فِى الْبُقْعَةِ الْمُبَارَكَةِ مِنَ الشَّجَرَةِ﴾
(from the right side of the valley, in the blessed place, from the tree.)

﴿أَن يمُوسَى إِنِّى أَنَا اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَـلَمِينَ﴾
(O Musa! Verily, I am Allah, the Lord of all that exits!) meaning, `the One Who is addressing you and speaking to you is the Lord of all that exits, the One Who does what He wills, the One apart from Whom there is no other god or lord, may He be exalted and sanctified, the One Who by His very nature, attributes, words and deeds is far above any resemblance to His creation, may He be glorified.

﴿وَأَنْ أَلْقِ عَصَاكَ﴾
(And throw your stick!) `the stick that is in your hand' -- as was stated in the Ayah,

﴿وَمَا تِلْكَ بِيَمِينِكَ يمُوسَى - قَالَ هِىَ عَصَاىَ أَتَوَكَّؤُا عَلَيْهَا وَأَهُشُّ بِهَا عَلَى غَنَمِى وَلِىَ فِيهَا مَأَرِبُ أُخْرَى ﴾
("And what is that in your right hand, O Musa'' He said: "This is my stick, whereon I lean, and wherewith I beat down branches for my sheep, and wherein I find other uses.'') (20:17-18). The meaning is: `this stick, which you know so well;'

﴿قَالَ أَلْقِهَا يمُوسَى - فَأَلْقَـهَا فَإِذَا هِىَ حَيَّةٌ تَسْعَى ﴾
("Cast it down, O Musa!'' He cast it down, and behold! It was a snake, moving quickly.) (20:19-20). Musa knew that the One Who was speaking to him was the One Who merely says to a thing, "Be!'' and it is, as we have already stated in (the explanation of) Surah Ta Ha. And here Allah says:

﴿فَلَمَّا رَءَاهَا تَهْتَزُّ كَأَنَّهَا جَآنٌّ وَلَّى مُدْبِراً﴾
(But when he saw it moving as if it were a snake, he turned in flight,) It moved so quickly, even though it was so big, and its mouth was so huge, with its jaws snapping. It swallowed every rock it passed, and every rock that fell into its mouth fell with a sound like a rock falling into a valley. When he saw that:

﴿وَلَّى مُدْبِراً وَلَمْ يُعَقِّبْ﴾
(he turned in flight, and looked not back.) he did not turn around, because it is human nature to flee from such a thing. But when Allah said to him:

﴿يمُوسَى أَقْبِلْ وَلاَ تَخَفْ إِنَّكَ مِنَ الاٌّمِنِينَ﴾
(O Musa! Draw near, and fear not. Verily, you are of those who are secure.) he came back to his original position. Then Allah said:

﴿اسْلُكْ يَدَكَ فِى جَيْبِكَ تَخْرُجْ بَيْضَآءَ مِنْ غَيْرِ سُوءٍ﴾
(Put your hand into the opening of your garment, it will come forth white without a disease;) meaning, `when you put your hand in your garment and then draw it out, it will be shining white as if it were a piece of the moon or a flash of lightning.' Allah said:

﴿مِنْ غَيْرِ سُوءٍ﴾
(without a disease) i.e., with no trace of leukoderma.

﴿وَاضْمُمْ إِلَيْكَ جَنَاحَكَ مِنَ الرَّهْبِ﴾
(and draw your hand close to your side to be free from the fear.) Mujahid said, "To be free from terror.'' Qatadah said, "To be free from fear.'' Musa was commanded, when he felt afraid of anything, to draw his hand close to his side to be free from the fear. If he did that, whatever fear he felt would be gone. Perhaps if a person does this, following the example of Musa, and puts his hand over his heart, his fear will disappear or be lessened, if Allah wills; in Allah we place our trust.

﴿فَذَانِكَ بُرْهَانَـنِ مِن رَّبِّكَ﴾
(These are two proofs from your Lord) This refers to the throwing down of his stick, whereupon it turned into a moving snake, and his putting his hand into his garment and bringing it forth white without a disease. These were two clear and definitive proofs of the power of the One Who does as He chooses, and of the truth of the prophethood of the one at whose hands these miracles occurred. Allah said:

﴿إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلإِيْهِ﴾
(to Fir`awn and his chiefs.) meaning his leaders and prominent followers.

﴿إِنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ قَوْماً فَـسِقِينَ﴾
(Verily, they are the people who are rebellious.) means, who are disobedient towards Allah and who go against His commands and His religion.