Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 28. Al-Qasas, Ayaat 21 To 24

فَخَرَجَ مِنْهَا خَائِفًا يَتَرَقَّبُ ۖ قَالَ رَبِّ نَجِّنِي مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ٢١وَلَمَّا تَوَجَّهَ تِلْقَاءَ مَدْيَنَ قَالَ عَسَىٰ رَبِّي أَنْ يَهْدِيَنِي سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ٢٢وَلَمَّا وَرَدَ مَاءَ مَدْيَنَ وَجَدَ عَلَيْهِ أُمَّةً مِنَ النَّاسِ يَسْقُونَ وَوَجَدَ مِنْ دُونِهِمُ امْرَأَتَيْنِ تَذُودَانِ ۖ قَالَ مَا خَطْبُكُمَا ۖ قَالَتَا لَا نَسْقِي حَتَّىٰ يُصْدِرَ الرِّعَاءُ ۖ وَأَبُونَا شَيْخٌ كَبِيرٌ٢٣فَسَقَىٰ لَهُمَا ثُمَّ تَوَلَّىٰ إِلَى الظِّلِّ فَقَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي لِمَا أَنْزَلْتَ إِلَيَّ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَقِيرٌ٢٤
21. So he escaped from there, looking about in a state of fear. He said: "My Lord! Save me from the people who are wrongdoers!'' 22. And when he went towards Madyan, he said: "It may be that my Lord guides me to the right way.'' 23. And when he arrived at the water of Madyan, he found there a group of men watering, and besides them he found two women who were keeping back (their flocks). He said: "What is the matter with you'' They said: "We cannot water (our flocks) until the shepherds take (their flocks). And our father is a very old man.'' 24. So he watered (their flocks) for them, then he turned back to shade, and said: "My Lord! Truly, I am in need of whatever good that You bestow on me!''

Musa, peace be upon him, in Madyan, and how He watered the Flocks of the Two Women

When the man told Musa about how Fir`awn and his chiefs were conspiring against him, he left Egypt on his own. He was not used to being alone, because before that he had been living a life of luxury and ease, in a position of leadership.

﴿فَخَرَجَ مِنْهَا خَآئِفاً يَتَرَقَّبُ﴾
(So he escaped from there, looking about in a state of fear.) meaning, turning around and watching.

﴿قَالَ رَبِّ نَجِّنِى مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّـلِمِينَ﴾
(My Lord! Save me from the people who are wrongdoers!) means, from Fir`awn and his chiefs. It was mentioned that Allah sent to him an angel riding a horse, who showed him the way. And Allah knows best.

﴿وَلَمَّا تَوَجَّهَ تِلْقَآءَ مَدْيَنَ﴾
(And when he went towards (the land of) Madyan,) means, he took a smooth and easy route -- and he rejoiced because of that.

﴿قَالَ عَسَى رَبِّى أَن يَهْدِيَنِى سَوَآءَ السَّبِيلِ﴾
(he said: "It may be that my Lord guides me to the right way.'') meaning, the most straight route. And Allah did indeed do that, for He guided him to the straight path in this world and the Hereafter, and caused him to be guided and to guide others.

﴿وَلَمَّا وَرَدَ مَآءَ مَدْيَنَ﴾
(And when he arrived at the water (a well) of Madyan,) means, when he reached Madyan and went to drink from its water, for it had a well where shepherds used to water their flocks,

﴿وَجَدَ عَلَيْهِ أُمَّةً مِّنَ النَّاسِ يَسْقُونَ وَوَجَدَ مِن دُونِهِمُ امْرَأَتَينِ تَذُودَانِ﴾
(he found there a group of men watering, and besides them he found two women who were keeping back.) means, they were stopping their sheep from drinking with the sheep of those shepherds, lest some harm come to them. When Musa, peace be upon him, saw them, he felt sorry for them and took pity on them.

﴿قَالَ مَا خَطْبُكُمَا﴾
(He said: "What is the matter with you'') meaning, `why do you not water your flocks with these people'

﴿قَالَتَا لاَ نَسْقِى حَتَّى يُصْدِرَ الرِّعَآءُ﴾
(They said: "We cannot water until the shepherds take...'') meaning, `we cannot water our flocks until they finish.'

﴿وَأَبُونَا شَيْخٌ كَبِيرٌ﴾
(And our father is a very old man.) means, `this is what has driven us to what you see.'

﴿فَسَقَى لَهُمَا﴾
(So he watered (their flocks) for them, )

﴿ثُمَّ تَوَلَّى إِلَى الظِّلِّ فَقَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّى لِمَآ أَنزَلْتَ إِلَىَّ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَقِيرٌ﴾
(then he turned back to shade, and said: "My Lord! Truly, I am in need of whatever good that You bestow on me!'')

﴿إِلَى الظِّلِّ﴾
(to shade,) Ibn `Abbas, Ibn Mas`ud and As-Suddi said: "He sat beneath a tree.'' `Ata' bin As-Sa'ib said: "When Musa said:

﴿رَبِّ إِنِّى لِمَآ أَنزَلْتَ إِلَىَّ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَقِيرٌ﴾
("My Lord! Truly, I am in need of whatever good that You bestow on me!'') the women heard him.''