Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 14. Ibrahim, Ayaat 38 To 41

رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ تَعْلَمُ مَا نُخْفِي وَمَا نُعْلِنُ ۗ وَمَا يَخْفَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ مِنْ شَيْءٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا فِي السَّمَاءِ٣٨الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي وَهَبَ لِي عَلَى الْكِبَرِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ ۚ إِنَّ رَبِّي لَسَمِيعُ الدُّعَاءِ٣٩رَبِّ اجْعَلْنِي مُقِيمَ الصَّلَاةِ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي ۚ رَبَّنَا وَتَقَبَّلْ دُعَاءِ٤٠رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْحِسَابُ٤١
38. "O our Lord! Certainly, You know what we conceal and what we reveal. Nothing on the earth or in the heaven is hidden from Allah.'' 39. "All praise is due to Allah, Who has given me in old age Isma'il and Ishaq. Verily, my Lord is indeed the All-Hearer of invocations.'' 40. "O my Lord! Make me one who performs Salah, and (also) from my offspring, our Lord! And accept my invocation.'' 41. "Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents, and (all) the believers on the Day when the reckoning will be established.'') Ibn Jarir At-Tabari said, "Allah said that Ibrahim, His Khalil, said,

﴿رَبَّنَآ إِنَّكَ تَعْلَمُ مَا نُخْفِى وَمَا نُعْلِنُ﴾
(O our Lord! Certainly, You know what we conceal and what we reveal.) meaning, `You know the intention behind my supplication for the people of this town, seeking Your pleasure in sincerity to You. You know all things, apparent and hidden, and nothing escapes Your knowledge on the earth or in heaven.''' He next praised and thanked his Lord the Exalted and Most Honored for granting him offspring after he became old,

﴿الْحَمْدُ للَّهِ الَّذِى وَهَبَ لِى عَلَى الْكِبَرِ إِسْمَـعِيلَ وَإِسْحَـقَ إِنَّ رَبِّى لَسَمِيعُ الدُّعَآءِ ﴾
(All praise is due to Allah, Who has given me in old age Isma'il (Ishmael) and Ishaq (Isaac). Verily, my Lord is indeed the All-Hearer of invocations.) `He accepts the supplication of those who invoke Him, and has accepted my invocation when I asked Him to grant me offspring. ' Ibrahim said next,

﴿رَبِّ اجْعَلْنِى مُقِيمَ الصَّلوةِ﴾
(O my Lord! Make me one who performs Salah,), preserving its obligations and limits,

﴿وَمِن ذُرِّيَتِى﴾
(and (also) from my offspring,), make them among those who establish the prayer, as well,

﴿رَبَّنَا وَتَقَبَّلْ دُعَآءِ﴾
(our Lord! And accept my invocation.), all of my invocation which I invoked You with herein,

﴿رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لِى وَلِوَالِدَىَّ﴾
(Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents,) Ibrahim said this before he declared himself innocent from his father, after he became sure that he was an enemy of Allah,

﴿وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ﴾
(and the believers), all of them,

﴿يَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْحِسَابُ﴾
(on the Day when the reckoning will be established.) on the Day when You will reckon Your servants and recompense or reward them for their deeds - good for good and evil for evil.