Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 14. Ibrahim, Ayah 37

رَبَّنَا إِنِّي أَسْكَنْتُ مِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي بِوَادٍ غَيْرِ ذِي زَرْعٍ عِنْدَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ رَبَّنَا لِيُقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ فَاجْعَلْ أَفْئِدَةً مِنَ النَّاسِ تَهْوِي إِلَيْهِمْ وَارْزُقْهُمْ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَشْكُرُونَ٣٧
37. "O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring dwell in an uncultivable valley by Your Sacred House in order, O our Lord, that they may perform Salah. So fill some hearts among men with love towards them, and (O Allah) provide them with fruits so that they may give thanks.) This Ayah indicates that this was different supplication than the first one that Ibrahim said when he left Hajar and her son Isma`il in Makkah, before the Sacred House was built. This prayer, it appears, was said after the House was built, begging Allah and seeking His favor, and He is the Exalted and Most Honored. Ibrahim said here,

﴿عِندَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ﴾
(by Your Sacred House...) then he,

﴿رَبَّنَا لِيُقِيمُواْ الصَّلوةَ﴾
(O our Lord, that they may perform Salah.) Ibn Jarir At-Tabari commented that this, "Refers to his earlier statement,

﴿الْمُحَرَّمِ﴾
(the Sacred...),'' meaning, `You have made this House Sacred so that people establish the prayer next to it,'

﴿فَاجْعَلْ أَفْئِدَةً مَّنَ النَّاسِ تَهْوِى إِلَيْهِمْ﴾
(So fill some hearts among men with love towards them,) Ibn `Abbas, Mujahid and Sa'id bin Jubayr said, "Had Ibrahim said, `The hearts of mankind', Persians, Romans, the Jews, the Christians and all other people would have gathered around it.'' However, Ibrahim said,

﴿مِنَ النَّاسِ﴾
(among men), thus making it exclusive to Muslims only. He said next,

﴿وَارْزُقْهُمْ مِّنَ الثَّمَرَتِ﴾
(and (O Allah) provide them with fruits) in order that they may be helped in obeying You, and because this is a barren valley; bring to them fruits that they might eat. Allah accepted Ibrahim's supplication,

﴿أَوَلَمْ نُمَكِّن لَّهُمْ حَرَماً ءَامِناً يُجْبَى إِلَيْهِ ثَمَرَاتُ كُلِّ شَىْءٍ رِّزْقاً مِّن لَّدُنَّا﴾
(Have We not established for them a secure sanctuary (Makkah), to which are brought fruits of all kinds, a provision from Ourselves.) ﴿28:57﴾ This only indicates Allah's compassion, kindness, mercy and blessing, in that there are no fruit producing trees in the Sacred City, Makkah, yet all kinds of fruits are being brought to it from all around; this is how Allah accepted the supplication of the Khalil - Allah's intimate friend, Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him.