Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 23. Al-Muminun, Ayaat 23 To 25

وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحًا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ فَقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرُهُ ۖ أَفَلَا تَتَّقُونَ٢٣فَقَالَ الْمَلَأُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ قَوْمِهِ مَا هَٰذَا إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُكُمْ يُرِيدُ أَنْ يَتَفَضَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَأَنْزَلَ مَلَائِكَةً مَا سَمِعْنَا بِهَٰذَا فِي آبَائِنَا الْأَوَّلِينَ٢٤إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا رَجُلٌ بِهِ جِنَّةٌ فَتَرَبَّصُوا بِهِ حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ٢٥
23. And indeed We sent Nuh to his people, and he said: "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other God but Him. Will you not then have Taqwa'' 24. But the chiefs of his people who disbelieved said: "He is no more than a human being like you, he seeks to make himself superior to you. Had Allah willed, He surely could have sent down angels. Never did we hear such a thing among our fathers of old.'' 25. "He is only a man in whom is madness, so wait for him a while.''

The Story of Nuh, Peace be upon Him; and his people

Allah tells us about Nuh, peace be upon him, whom He sent him to his people to warn them of the severe punishment of Allah and His severe vengeance on those who associated partners with Him, defied His commands and disbelieved His Messengers:

﴿فَقَالَ يَقَوْمِ اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِّنْ إِلَـهٍ غَيْرُهُ أَفَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ﴾
(and he said: "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other God but Him. Will you not then have Taqwa'') Meaning, "Do you not fear Allah when you associate others in worship with Him'' The chiefs or leaders of his people said:

﴿مَا هَـذَا إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُكُمْ يُرِيدُ أَن يَتَفَضَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ﴾
(He is no more than a human being like you, he seeks to make himself superior to you.) meaning, `he is putting himself above you and trying to make himself great by claiming to be a Prophet, but he is a human being like you, so how can he receive revelation when you do not'

﴿وَلَوْ شَآءَ اللَّهُ لاّنزَلَ مَلَـئِكَةً﴾
(Had Allah willed, He surely could have sent down angels.) meaning, `if Allah had wanted to send a Prophet, He would have sent an angel from Him, not a human being. We have never heard of such a thing -- i.e., sending a man to our forefathers' -- their predecessors in times past.

﴿إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ رَجُلٌ بِهِ جِنَّةٌ﴾
(He is only a man in whom is madness,) means, `he is crazy in his claim that Allah has sent him and chosen him from among you to receive revelation.'

﴿فَتَرَبَّصُواْ بِهِ حَتَّى حِينٍ﴾
(so wait for him a while.) means, `wait until he dies, put up with him until you are rid of him.'