Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayah 85

وَإِلَىٰ مَدْيَنَ أَخَاهُمْ شُعَيْبًا ۗ قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرُهُ ۖ قَدْ جَاءَتْكُمْ بَيِّنَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ ۖ فَأَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ وَالْمِيزَانَ وَلَا تَبْخَسُوا النَّاسَ أَشْيَاءَهُمْ وَلَا تُفْسِدُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ بَعْدَ إِصْلَاحِهَا ۚ ذَٰلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ٨٥

85. And to (the people of) Madyan, (We sent) their brother Shu`ayb. He said: "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other God but Him. Verily, a clear proof (sign) from your Lord has come unto you; so give full measure and full weight and wrong not men in their things, and do not do mischief on the earth after it has been set in order, that will be better for you, if you are believers.

Story of Shu`ayb, upon him be Peace, and the Land of Madyan

Muhammad bin Ishaq said, "They (the people of Madyan) are the descendents of Madyan, son of Midyan, son of Ibrahim. Shu`ayb was the son of Mikil bin Yashjur. And in the Syrian language, his name was Yathrun (Jethro)''. I (Ibn Kathir) say, Madyan was the name of the tribe and also a city that is close to Ma`an on route to the Hijaz (from Ash-Sham). Allah said in another Ayah,

﴿وَلَمَّا وَرَدَ مَآءَ مَدْيَنَ وَجَدَ عَلَيْهِ أُمَّةً مِّنَ النَّاسِ يَسْقُونَ﴾
(And when he arrived at the water (a well) of Madyan he found there a group of men watering (their flocks).) ﴿28:23﴾ They are also the people of Al-Aykah (the Woods), as we will mention later on, Allah willing, and our trust is in Him.

﴿قَالَ يَاقَوْمِ اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِّنْ إِلَـهٍ غَيْرُهُ﴾
(He said: "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other God but Him'') and this is the call of all Messengers,

﴿قَدْ جَآءَتْكُم بَيِّنَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ﴾
("Verily, a clear proof (sign) from your Lord has come unto you;'') meaning, `Allah has presented the proof and evidences of the truth of what I brought you.' He then advised them and commanded them to give full measure and full weight and not to wrong men in their dealings, meaning, to refrain from cheating people in buying and selling. They used to treacherously avoid giving full weight and measure. Allah said in other Ayat,

﴿وَيْلٌ لِّلْمُطَفِّفِينَ ﴾
(Woe to Al-Mutaffifin (those who give less in measure and weight)...) ﴿83:1﴾ until He said,

﴿لِرَبِّ الْعَـلَمِينَ﴾
(before the Lord of all that exists) ﴿83:6﴾. These Ayat contain a stern warning and sure promise that we ask Allah to save us from. Shu`ayb was called `Speaker of the Prophets', because of his eloquent words and eloquent advice, and Allah stated that Shu`ayb said: