Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayaat 104 To 106

وَقَالَ مُوسَىٰ يَا فِرْعَوْنُ إِنِّي رَسُولٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ١٠٤حَقِيقٌ عَلَىٰ أَنْ لَا أَقُولَ عَلَى اللَّهِ إِلَّا الْحَقَّ ۚ قَدْ جِئْتُكُمْ بِبَيِّنَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ فَأَرْسِلْ مَعِيَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ١٠٥قَالَ إِنْ كُنْتَ جِئْتَ بِآيَةٍ فَأْتِ بِهَا إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ١٠٦
104. And Musa said: "O Fir`awn! Verily, I am a Messenger from the Lord of all that exists.'' 105. "Proper it is for me that I say nothing concerning Allah but the truth. Indeed I have come unto you from your Lord with a clear proof. So let the Children of Israel depart along with me.'' 106. ﴿Fir`awn﴾ said: "If you have come with a sign, show it forth, if you are one of those who tell the truth.'') Allah mentions a debate that took place between Musa and Fir`awn, and Musa's refuting Fir`awn with the unequivocal proof and clear miracles, in the presence of Fir`awn and his people, the Copts of Egypt. Allah said,

﴿وَقَالَ مُوسَى يَفِرْعَوْنُ إِنَّى رَسُولٌ مِّن رَّبِّ الْعَـلَمِينَ ﴾
(And Musa said: "O Fir`awn! Verily, I am a Messenger from the Lord of all that exists''.) meaning Musa said, `the one Who sent me is the Creator, Lord and King of all things,'

﴿حَقِيقٌ عَلَى أَن لاَ أَقُولَ عَلَى اللَّهِ إِلاَّ الْحَقَّ﴾
("Proper it is for me that I say nothing concerning Allah but the truth. '') `It is incumbent and a duty for me to convey only the Truth from Him, because of what I know of His might and power.'

﴿قَدْ جِئْتُكُمْ بِبَيِّنَةٍ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ﴾
("Indeed I have come unto you from your Lord with a clear proof.'') `I brought unequivocal evidence that Allah gave me to prove that I am conveying the truth to you,'

﴿فَأَرْسِلْ مَعِىَ بَنِى إِسْرَءِيلَ﴾
("So let the Children of Israel depart along with me.'') means, release them from your slavery and subjugation. Let them worship your Lord and their Lord. They are from the offspring of an honorable Prophet, Isra'il, who is Ya`qub son of Ishaq son of Ibrahim, the Khalil (intimate friend) of Allah.

﴿قَالَ إِن كُنتَ جِئْتَ بِـَايَةٍ فَأْتِ بِهَآ إِن كُنتَ مِنَ الصَّـدِقِينَ ﴾
(﴿Fir`awn﴾ said: "If you have come with a sign, show it forth, if you are one of those who tell the truth.'') Fir`awn said, `I will not believe in what you have said nor entertain your request'. Therefore, he said, `if you have proof, then produce it for us to see, so that we know if your claim is true.'