Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayah 100

أَوَلَمْ يَهْدِ لِلَّذِينَ يَرِثُونَ الْأَرْضَ مِنْ بَعْدِ أَهْلِهَا أَنْ لَوْ نَشَاءُ أَصَبْنَاهُمْ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ ۚ وَنَطْبَعُ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ فَهُمْ لَا يَسْمَعُونَ١٠٠
100. Is it not a guidance for those who inherit the earth from its previons inhabitants that had We willed, We would have punished them for their sins. And We seal up their hearts so that they hear not

Ibn `Abbas commented on Allah's statement,

﴿أَوَلَمْ يَهْدِ لِلَّذِينَ يَرِثُونَ الأَرْضَ مِن بَعْدِ أَهْلِهَآ﴾
(Is it not a guidance for those who inherit the earth from its previous inhabitants. ..) "(Allah says,) did We not make clear to them that had We willed, We would have punished them because of their sins'' Mujahid and several others said similarly. Abu Ja`far bin Jarir At-Tabari explained this Ayah, "Allah says, `Did We not make clear to those who succeeded on the earth after destroying the previous nations who used to dwell in that land. Then they followed their own ways, and behaved as they did and were unruly with their Lord. ﴿Did We not make clear to them﴾ that,

﴿أَن لَّوْ نَشَآءُ أَصَبْنَـهُمْ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ﴾
(that had We willed, We would have punished them for their sins.) by bringing them the same end that was decreed for those before them,

﴿وَنَطْبَعُ عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ﴾
(And We seal up their hearts), We place a cover over their heart,

﴿فَهُمْ لاَ يَسْمَعُونَ﴾
(so that they hear not), words of advice or reminding''' I say that similarly, Allah said,

﴿أَفَلَمْ يَهْدِ لَهُمْ كَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِّنَ الْقُرُونِ يَمْشُونَ فِى مَسَـكِنِهِمْ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لأَيَـتٍ لاٌّوْلِى النُّهَى ﴾
(Is it not a guidance for them: how many generations We have destroyed before them, in whose dwellings they walk Verily, in this are signs indeed for men of understanding.) ﴿20:128﴾

﴿أَوَلَمْ يَهْدِ لَهُمْ كَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا مِن قَبْلِهِمْ مِّنَ الْقُرُونِ يَمْشُونَ فِى مَسَاكِنِهِمْ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاّيَاتٍ أَفَلاَ يَسْمَعُونَ ﴾
(Is it not a guidance for them: how many generations We have destroyed before them in whose dwellings they do walk about Verily, therein indeed are signs. Would they not then listen) ﴿32:26﴾ and,

﴿أَوَلَمْ تَكُونُواْ أَقْسَمْتُمْ مِّن قَبْلُ مَا لَكُمْ مِّن زَوَالٍوَسَكَنتُمْ فِى مَسَـكِنِ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ﴾
(Had you not sworn aforetime that you would not leave (the world for the Hereafter). And you dwelt in the dwellings of men who wronged themselves)﴿14:44-45﴾ Also, Allah said,

﴿وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِّن قَرْنٍ هَلْ تُحِسُّ مِنْهُمْ مِّنْ أَحَدٍ أَوْ تَسْمَعُ لَهُمْ رِكْزاً ﴾
(And how many a generation before them have We destroyed! Can you find a single one of them or hear even a whisper of them) ﴿19:98﴾ meaning, do you see any of them or hear their voices There are many other Ayat that testify that Allah's torment strikes His enemies, while His bounty reaches His faithful believers. Thereafter comes Allah's statement, and He is the Most Truthful, the Lord of all that exists,