Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayah 18

قَالَ اخْرُجْ مِنْهَا مَذْءُومًا مَدْحُورًا ۖ لَمَنْ تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ لَأَمْلَأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنْكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ١٨
18. (Allah) said (to Iblis): "Get out from this (Paradise), Madh'uman Madhura. Whoever of them (mankind) will follow you, then surely, I will fill Hell with you all.'') Allah emphasized His cursing, expelling, banishing and turning Shaytan away from the uppermost heights, saying; Ibn Jarir said, "As for Madh'um, it is disgraced.'' And he said, "Madhur is the distanced, that is, he is banished and expelled.'' `Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, "We do not know of any who is Madh'uh and Madhmum except for one.'' Sufyan Ath-Thawri narrated from Abu Ishaq from At-Tamimi from Ibn `Abbas,

﴿اخْرُجْ مِنْهَا مَذْءُومًا مَّدْحُورًا﴾
(Get out from this (Paradise), Madh'uman Madhura) "despised.'' `Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn `Abbas commented on,

﴿اخْرُجْ مِنْهَا مَذْءُومًا مَّدْحُورًا﴾
(Get out from this (Paradise), Madh'uman Madhura) ﴿7:18﴾ "Belittled and despised'', while As-Suddi commented, "Hateful and expelled.'' Qatadah commented, "Cursed and despised'', while Mujahid said, "Expelled and banished.'' Ar-Rabi` bin Anas said that `Madh'um' means banished, while, `Madhura' means belittled. Allah said,

﴿لَّمَن تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ لأَمْلأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ﴾
(Whoever of them (mankind) will follow you, then surely, I will fill Hell with you all.) This is similar to

﴿قَالَ اذْهَبْ فَمَن تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ فَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ جَزَآؤُكُمْ جَزَاءً مَّوفُورًا - وَاسْتَفْزِزْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتَ مِنْهُمْ بِصَوْتِكَ وَأَجْلِبْ عَلَيْهِم بِخَيْلِكَ وَرَجِلِكَ وَشَارِكْهُمْ فِى الاٌّمْوَلِ وَالاٌّوْلَـدِ وَعِدْهُمْ وَمَا يَعِدُهُمُ الشَّيْطَـنُ إِلاَّ غُرُورًا - إِنَّ عِبَادِى لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَـنٌ وَكَفَى بِرَبِّكَ وَكِيلاً ﴾
((Allah) said: "Go, and whosoever of them follows you, surely, Hell will be the recompense of you (all) an ample recompense. And gradually delude those whom you can among them with your voice, make assaults on them with your cavalry and your infantry, share with them wealth and children, and make promises to them.'' But Shaytan promises them nothing but deceit. "Verily, My servants -- you have no authority over them. And All-Sufficient is your Lord as a Guardian.'') ﴿17:63-65﴾