Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayaat 50 To 51

وَنَادَىٰ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ أَنْ أَفِيضُوا عَلَيْنَا مِنَ الْمَاءِ أَوْ مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمُ اللَّهُ ۚ قَالُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ حَرَّمَهُمَا عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ٥٠الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا دِينَهُمْ لَهْوًا وَلَعِبًا وَغَرَّتْهُمُ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا ۚ فَالْيَوْمَ نَنْسَاهُمْ كَمَا نَسُوا لِقَاءَ يَوْمِهِمْ هَٰذَا وَمَا كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا يَجْحَدُونَ٥١
50. And the dwellers of the Fire will call to the dwellers of Paradise: "Pour on us some water or anything that Allah has provided you with.'' They will say: "Both (water and provision) Allah has forbidden for the disbelievers. 51. "Who took their religion as amusement and play, and the life of the world deceived them.'' So this Day We shall forget them as they forgot their meeting of this Day, and as they used to reject Our Ayat.

The Favors of paradise are Prohibited for the People of the Fire

Allah emphasizes the disgrace of the people of the Fire. They will ask the people of Paradise for some of their drink and food, but they will not be given any of that. As-Suddi said,

﴿وَنَادَى أَصْحَـبُ النَّارِ أَصْحَـبَ الْجَنَّةِ أَنْ أَفِيضُواْ عَلَيْنَا مِنَ الْمَآءِ أَوْ مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمُ اللَّهُ﴾
(And the dwellers of the Fire will call to the dwellers of Paradise: "Pour on us some water or anything that Allah has provided you with.'') "That is food''. Ath-Thawri said that `Uthman Ath-Thaqafi said that Sa`id bin Jubayr commented on this Ayah, "One of them will call his father or brother, `I have been burned, so pour some water on me.' The believers will be asked to reply, and they will reply,

﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ حَرَّمَهُمَا عَلَى الْكَـفِرِينَ﴾
("Both Allah has forbidden to the disbelievers.'')'' `Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said that,

﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ حَرَّمَهُمَا عَلَى الْكَـفِرِينَ﴾
("Both Allah has forbidden to the disbelievers.'') "Refers to the food and drink of Paradise.'' Allah describes the disbelievers by what they used to do in this life, taking the religion as amusement and play, and being deceived by this life and its adornment, rather than working for the Hereafter as Allah commanded,

﴿فَالْيَوْمَ نَنسَـهُمْ كَمَا نَسُواْ لِقَآءَ يَوْمِهِمْ هَـذَا﴾
(So this Day We shall forget them as they forgot their meeting of this Day) meaning, Allah will treat them as if He has forgotten them. Certainly, nothing escapes Allah's perfect watch and He never forgets anything. Allah said in another Ayah,

﴿فِى كِتَـبٍ لاَّ يَضِلُّ رَبِّى وَلاَ يَنسَى﴾
(In a Record. My Lord neither errs nor forgets) ﴿20:52﴾ Allah said -- that He will forget them on that Day -- as just recompense for them, because,

﴿نَسُواْ اللَّهَ فَنَسِيَهُمْ﴾
(They have forgotten Allah, so He has forgotten them) ﴿9:67﴾

﴿كَذَلِكَ أَتَتْكَ آيَـتُنَا فَنَسِيتَهَا وَكَذلِكَ الْيَوْمَ تُنْسَى﴾
(Like this: Our Ayat came unto you, but you disregarded them, and so this Day, you will be neglected) ﴿20:126﴾ and,

﴿وَقِيلَ الْيَوْمَ نَنسَاكُمْ كَمَا نَسِيتُمْ لِقَآءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَـذَا﴾
(And it will be said: "This Day We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours.'') ﴿45:34﴾ Al-`Awfi reported that Ibn `Abbas commented on,

﴿فَالْيَوْمَ نَنسَـهُمْ كَمَا نَسُواْ لِقَآءَ يَوْمِهِمْ هَـذَا﴾
(So this Day We shall forget them as they forgot their meeting of this Day) "Allah will forget the good about them, but not their evil.'' And `Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn `Abbas said, "We shall forsake them as they have forsaken the meeting of this Day of theirs.'' Mujahid said, "We shall leave them in the Fire.'' As-Suddi said, "We shall leave them from any mercy, just as they left any action on behalf of the meeting on this Day of theirs.'' It is recorded in the Sahih that Allah will say to the servant on the Day of Resurrection:

«أَلَمْ أُزَوِّجْكَ؟ أَلَمْ أُكْرِمْكَ؟ أَلَمْ أُسَخِّرْ لَكَ الْخَيْلَ وَالْإِبِلَ وَأَذَرْكَ تَرْأَسُ وَتَرْبَعُ؟ فَيَقُولُ: بَلَى، فَيَقُولُ: أَظَنَنْتَ أَنَّكَ مُلَاقِيَّ؟ فَيَقُولُ: لَا، فَيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَى: فَالْيَوْمَ أَنْسَاكَ كَمَا نَسِيتَنِي»
("Have I not gotten you married Have I not honored you Have I not made horses and camels subservient for you and allowed you to become a leader and a master'' He will say, "Yes.'' Allah will say, "Did you think that you will meet Me'' He will say, "No.'' Allah the Exalted will say, `Then this Day, I will forget you as you have forgotten Me.'')