Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayaat 44 To 45

وَنَادَىٰ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ أَصْحَابَ النَّارِ أَنْ قَدْ وَجَدْنَا مَا وَعَدَنَا رَبُّنَا حَقًّا فَهَلْ وَجَدْتُمْ مَا وَعَدَ رَبُّكُمْ حَقًّا ۖ قَالُوا نَعَمْ ۚ فَأَذَّنَ مُؤَذِّنٌ بَيْنَهُمْ أَنْ لَعْنَةُ اللَّهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ٤٤الَّذِينَ يَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَيَبْغُونَهَا عِوَجًا وَهُمْ بِالْآخِرَةِ كَافِرُونَ٤٥
44. And the dwellers of Paradise will call out to the dwellers of the Fire (saying): "We have indeed found true what our Lord had promised us; have you also found true what your Lord promised (warned)'' They shall say: "Yes.'' Then a crier will proclaim between them: "The curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers.'' 45. Those who hindered (men) from the path of Allah, and would seek to make it crooked, and they were disbelievers in the Hereafter.

People of Hellfire will feel Anguish upon Anguish

Allah mentioned how the people of the Fire will be addressed, chastised and admonished when they take their places in the Fire,

﴿قَدْ وَجَدْنَا مَا وَعَدَنَا رَبُّنَا حَقًّا فَهَلْ وَجَدتُّم مَّا وَعَدَ رَبُّكُمْ حَقًّا قَالُواْ نَعَمْ﴾
("We (dwellers of Paradise) have indeed found true what our Lord had promised us; have you (dwellers of Hell) also found true what your Lord promised (warned)'' They shall say: "Yes.'') In Surat As-Saffat, Allah mentioned the one who had a disbelieving companion,

﴿فَاطَّلَعَ فَرَءَاهُ فِى سَوَآءِ الْجَحِيمِ - قَالَ تَاللَّهِ إِن كِدتَّ لَتُرْدِينِ - وَلَوْلاَ نِعْمَةُ رَبِّى لَكُنتُ مِنَ الْمُحْضَرِينَ - أَفَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَيِّتِينَ - إِلاَّ مَوْتَتَنَا الاٍّولَى وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ ﴾
(So he looked down and saw him in the midst of the Fire. He said: "By Allah! You have nearly ruined me. Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I would certainly have been among those brought forth (to Hell).'' (The dwellers of Paradise will say!) "Are we then not to die (any more) Except our first death, and we shall not be punished'') ﴿37:55-59﴾. Allah will punish the disbeliever for the claims he used to utter in this life. The angels will also admonish the disbelievers, saying,

﴿هَـذِهِ النَّارُ الَّتِى كُنتُم بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ - أَفَسِحْرٌ هَـذَا أَمْ أَنتُمْ لاَ تُبْصِرُونَ - اصْلَوْهَا فَاصْبِرُواْ أَوْ لاَ تَصْبِرُواْ سَوَآءٌ عَلَيْكُمْ إِنَّمَا تُجْزَوْنَ مَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ ﴾
(This is the Fire which you used to belie. Is this magic or do you not see Taste you therein its heat and whether you are patient of it or impatient of it, it is all the same. You are only being requited for what you used to do) ﴿52:14-16﴾. The Messenger of Allah admonished the inhabitants of the well at Badr:

«يَا أَبَا جَهْلِ بْنَ هِشَامٍ وَيَا عُتْبَةَ بْنَ رَبِيعَةَ وَيَا شَيْبَةَ بْنَ رَبِيعَةَ وَسَمَّى رُؤُوسَهُمْ هَلْ وَجَدْتُمْ مَا وَعَدَ رَبُّكُمْ حَقًّا فَإِنِّي وَجَدْتُ مَا وَعَدَنِي رَبِّي حَقًّا»
(O Abu Jahl bin Hisham! O `Utbah bin Rabi`ah! O Shaybah bin Rabi`ah (and he called their leaders by name)! Have you found what your Lord promised to be true (the Fire) I certainly found what my Lord has promised me to be true (victory).) `Umar said, "O Allah's Messenger! Do you address a people who have become rotten carrion'' He said,

«وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ مَا أَنْتُمْ بِأَسْمَعَ لِمَا أَقُولُ مِنْهُمْ وَلَكِنْ لَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ أَنْ يُجِيبُوا»
(By He in Whose Hand is my soul! You do not hear what I am saying better than they do, but they cannot reply.) Allah's statement,

﴿فَأَذَّنَ مُؤَذِّنٌ بَيْنَهُمْ﴾
(Then a crier will proclaim between them) will herald and announce,

﴿أَن لَّعْنَةُ اللَّهِ عَلَى الظَّـلِمِينَ﴾
(The curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers) meaning, the curse will reside with the wrongdoers. Allah then described them by saying,

﴿الَّذِينَ يَصُدُّونَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَيَبْغُونَهَا عِوَجًا﴾
(Those who hindered (men) from the path of Allah, and would seek to make it crooked) meaning, they hindered the people from following Allah's path, His Law, and what the Prophets brought. They sought to make Allah's path appear crooked and winding, so that no one would follow it. Allah said,

﴿وَهُم بِالاٌّخِرَةِ كَـفِرُونَ﴾
(and they were disbelievers in the Hereafter) They disbelieved in the Meeting with Allah in the Hereafter, They used to deny this will ever occur, not accepting it nor believing in it. This is why they used to discount the seriousness of the evil deeds and statements that they committed, because they did not fear any reckoning or punishment. Therefore, they were and are indeed the worst people in statement and action.