Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayaat 86 To 87

وَلَا تَقْعُدُوا بِكُلِّ صِرَاطٍ تُوعِدُونَ وَتَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ مَنْ آمَنَ بِهِ وَتَبْغُونَهَا عِوَجًا ۚ وَاذْكُرُوا إِذْ كُنْتُمْ قَلِيلًا فَكَثَّرَكُمْ ۖ وَانْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُفْسِدِينَ٨٦وَإِنْ كَانَ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْكُمْ آمَنُوا بِالَّذِي أُرْسِلْتُ بِهِ وَطَائِفَةٌ لَمْ يُؤْمِنُوا فَاصْبِرُوا حَتَّىٰ يَحْكُمَ اللَّهُ بَيْنَنَا ۚ وَهُوَ خَيْرُ الْحَاكِمِينَ٨٧
86. "And sit not on every road, threatening, and hindering from the path of Allah those who believe in Him, and seeking to make it crooked. And remember when you were but few, and He multiplied you. And see what was the end of the mischief-makers. 87. "And if there is a party of you who believes in that with which I have been sent and a party who does not believe, so be patient until Allah judges between us, and He is the best of judges.''

Prophet Shu`ayb forbade his people from setting up blockades on the roads, saying,

﴿وَلاَ تَقْعُدُواْ بِكُلِّ صِرَطٍ تُوعِدُونَ﴾
("And sit not on every road, threatening,'') threatening people with death if they do not give up their money, as they were bandits, according to As-Suddi. Ibn `Abbas, Mujahid and several others commented:

﴿وَلاَ تَقْعُدُواْ بِكُلِّ صِرَطٍ تُوعِدُونَ﴾
("And sit not on every road, threatening.'') the believers who come to Shu`ayb to follow him.'' The first meaning is better, because Prophet Shu`ayb first said to them,

﴿بِكُلِّ صِرَطٍ﴾
("on every road...'') He then mentioned the second meaning,

﴿وَتَصُدُّونَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ مَنْ ءَامَنَ بِهِ وَتَبْغُونَهَا عِوَجًا﴾
("and hindering from the path of Allah those who believe in Him, and seeking to make it crooked.'') meaning, you seek to make the path of Allah crooked and deviated,

﴿وَاذْكُرُواْ إِذْ كُنتُمْ قَلِيلاً فَكَثَّرَكُمْ﴾
("And remember when you were but few, and He multiplied you.'') meaning, you were weak because you were few. But you later on became mighty because of your large numbers. Therefore, remember Allah's favor.

﴿وَانظُرُواْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَـقِبَةُ الْمُفْسِدِينَ﴾
("And see what was the end of the mischief-makers. '') from the previous nations and earlier generations. See the torment and punishment they suffered, because they disobeyed Allah and rejected His Messengers. Shu`ayb continued;

﴿وَإِن كَانَ طَآئِفَةٌ مِّنكُمْ ءامَنُواْ بِالَّذِى أُرْسِلْتُ بِهِ وَطَآئِفَةٌ لَّمْ يْؤْمِنُواْ﴾
("And if there is a party of you who believes in that with which I have been sent and a party who does not believe,'') that is, if you divided concerning me,

﴿فَاصْبِرُواْ﴾
("so be patient'') that is, then wait and see,

﴿حَتَّى يَحْكُمَ اللَّهُ بَيْنَنَا﴾
("until Allah judges between us,''), and you,

﴿وَهُوَ خَيْرُ الْحَـكِمِينَ﴾
("and He is the best of judges.'') Surely, Allah will award the best end to those who fear and obey Him and He will destroy the disbelievers.