Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayaat 88 To 89

۞ قَالَ الْمَلَأُ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا مِنْ قَوْمِهِ لَنُخْرِجَنَّكَ يَا شُعَيْبُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَكَ مِنْ قَرْيَتِنَا أَوْ لَتَعُودُنَّ فِي مِلَّتِنَا ۚ قَالَ أَوَلَوْ كُنَّا كَارِهِينَ٨٨قَدِ افْتَرَيْنَا عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا إِنْ عُدْنَا فِي مِلَّتِكُمْ بَعْدَ إِذْ نَجَّانَا اللَّهُ مِنْهَا ۚ وَمَا يَكُونُ لَنَا أَنْ نَعُودَ فِيهَا إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ رَبُّنَا ۚ وَسِعَ رَبُّنَا كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عِلْمًا ۚ عَلَى اللَّهِ تَوَكَّلْنَا ۚ رَبَّنَا افْتَحْ بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَ قَوْمِنَا بِالْحَقِّ وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ الْفَاتِحِينَ٨٩
88. The chiefs of those who were arrogant among his people said: "We shall certainly drive you out, O Shu`ayb and those who have believed with you from our town, or else you (all) shall return to our religion.'' He said: "Even though we hate it'' 89. "We should have invented a lie against Allah if we returned to your religion, after Allah has rescued us from it. And it is not for us to return to it unless Allah, our Lord, should will. Our Lord comprehends all things in His knowledge. In Allah (Alone) we put our trust. Our Lord! Judge between us and our people in truth, for You are the best of those who give judgment.''

Allah describes the way the disbelievers answered His Prophet Shu` ayb and those who believed in him, by threatening them with expulsion from their village, or with forceful reversion to the disbeliever's religion.

The chiefs spoke the words mentioned here to the Messenger Shu`ayb, but intended it for those who followed his religion too. The statement,

﴿أَوَلَوْ كُنَّا كَـرِهِينَ﴾
("Even though we hate it''), means, would you force us to do that, even though we hate what you are calling us to Certainly if we revert to your religion and accept your ways, we will have uttered a tremendous lie against Allah by calling partners as rivals to Him,

﴿وَمَا يَكُونُ لَنَآ أَن نَّعُودَ فِيهَآ إِلاَ أَن يَشَآءَ اللَّهُ رَبُّنَا﴾
(And it is not for us to return to it unless Allah, our Lord, should will.) This part of the Ayah refers all matters to Allah's will, and certainly, He has perfect knowledge of all matters and His observation encompasses all things,

﴿عَلَى اللَّهِ تَوَكَّلْنَا﴾
(In Allah (Alone) we put our trust. ), concerning all our affairs, what we practice of them and what we ignore,

﴿رَبَّنَا افْتَحْ بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَ قَوْمِنَا بِالْحَقِّ﴾
(Our Lord! Judge between us and our people in truth) judge between us and our people and give us victory over them,

﴿وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ الْفَـتِحِينَ﴾
(for You are the best of those who give judgment) and You are the Most Just Who never wrongs any in His judgment.