Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayaat 117 To 122

۞ وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ أَنْ أَلْقِ عَصَاكَ ۖ فَإِذَا هِيَ تَلْقَفُ مَا يَأْفِكُونَ١١٧فَوَقَعَ الْحَقُّ وَبَطَلَ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ١١٨فَغُلِبُوا هُنَالِكَ وَانْقَلَبُوا صَاغِرِينَ١١٩وَأُلْقِيَ السَّحَرَةُ سَاجِدِينَ١٢٠قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ١٢١رَبِّ مُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ١٢٢
117. And We revealed to Musa (saying): "Throw your stick,'' and behold! It swallowed up straight away all the falsehood which they showed. 118. Thus truth was confirmed, and all that they did was made of no effect. 119. So they were defeated there and returned disgraced. 120. And the sorcerers fell down prostrate. 121. They said: "We believe in the Lord of all that exists. 122. "The Lord of Musa and Harun.''

Musa defeats the Magicians, Who believe in Him

Allah states that at that tremendous moment, in which Allah differentiated between Truth and Falsehood, He sent a revelation to His servant and Messenger Musa, peace be upon him, ordering him to throw the stick that he held in his right hand,

﴿فَإِذَا هِىَ تَلْقَفُ﴾
(It swallowed straight away) and devoured,

﴿مَا يَأْفِكُونَ﴾
(all the falsehood which they showed.) the magic that they caused the illusion with, of magic with which they caused making it appear real, whereas it was not real at all. Ibn `Abbas said that Musa's stick swallowed all the ropes and sticks that the magicians threw. The magicians realized that this was from heaven and was by no means magic. They fell in prostration and proclaimed,

﴿قَالُواْ ءَامَنَّا بِرَبِّ الْعَـلَمِينَ - رَبِّ مُوسَى وَهَـرُونَ ﴾
("We believe in the Lord of all that exists. The Lord of Musa and Harun ). Muhammad bin Ishaq commented, "It followed the ropes and sticks one after another, until nothing that the sorcerers threw remained. Musa then held it in his hand, and it became a stick again just as it was before. The magicians fell in prostration and proclaimed, `We believe in the Lord of all that exists, the Lord of Musa and Harun. Had Musa been a magician, he would not have prevailed over us. ''' Al-Qasim bin Abi Bazzah commented, "Allah revealed to Musa to throw his stick. When he threw his stick, it became a huge, manifest snake that opened its mouth and swallowed the magicians' ropes and sticks. On that, the magicians fell in prostration. They did not raise their heads before seeing the Paradise, the Fire, and the recompense of their inhabitants.''