Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayah 184

أَوَلَمْ يَتَفَكَّرُوا ۗ مَا بِصَاحِبِهِمْ مِنْ جِنَّةٍ ۚ إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ١٨٤
184. Do they not reflect There is no madness in their companion. He is but a plain warner.) Allah said,

﴿أَوَلَمْ يَتَفَكَّرُواْ﴾
(Do they not reflect) `those who deny Our Ayat,'

﴿مَا بِصَاحِبِهِم﴾
(there is not in their companion), Muhammad ,

﴿مِّن جِنَّةٍ﴾
(madness) Muhammad is not mad, rather, he is truly the Messenger of Allah, calling to Truth,

﴿إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌ﴾
(but he is a plain warner), and this is clear for those who have a mind and a heart by which they understand and comprehend. Allah said in another Ayah,

﴿وَمَا صَـحِبُكُمْ بِمَجْنُونٍ ﴾
(And (O people) your companion is not a madman.)﴿81:22﴾ Allah also said,

﴿قُلْ إِنَّمَآ أَعِظُكُمْ بِوَحِدَةٍ أَن تَقُومُواْ لِلَّهِ مَثْنَى وَفُرَادَى ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُواْ مَا بِصَـحِبِكُمْ مِّن جِنَّةٍ إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ نَذِيرٌ لَّكُمْ بَيْنَ يَدَىْ عَذَابٍ شَدِيدٍ ﴾
(Say: "I exhort you to one (thing) only, that you stand up for Allah's sake in pairs and singly, and reflect, there is no madness in your companion. He is only a warner to you in face of a severe torment.'') ﴿34:46﴾ meaning, `I ask you to stand for Allah in sincerity without stubbornness or bias,'

﴿مَثْنَى وَفُرَادَى﴾
(in pairs and singly) ﴿34:46﴾ individuals and in groups,

﴿ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُواْ﴾
(and reflect) ﴿34:46﴾, about this man who brought the Message from Allah, is he mad If you do this, it will become clear to you that he is the Messenger of Allah in truth and justice. Qatadah bin Di'amah said, "We were informed that the Prophet of Allah once was on (Mount) As-Safa and called the Quraysh, subtribe by subtribe, proclaiming,

«يَا بَنِي فُلَانٍ، يَا بَنِي فُلَانٍ فَحَذَّرَهُمْ بَأْسَ اللهِ وَوَقَائِعَ الله»
(O Children of so-and-so, O Children of so-and-so! He warned them against Allah's might and what He has done (such as revenge from His enemies).) Some of them commented, `This companion of yours (Prophet Muhammad) is mad; he kept shouting until the morning' Allah sent down this Ayah,

﴿أَوَلَمْ يَتَفَكَّرُواْ مَا بِصَاحِبِهِم مِّن جِنَّةٍ إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌ ﴾
(Do they not reflect There is no madness in their companion. He is but a plain warner) ﴿7:184﴾.'''