Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 7. Al-A'raf, Ayaat 63 To 64

أَوَعَجِبْتُمْ أَنْ جَاءَكُمْ ذِكْرٌ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ عَلَىٰ رَجُلٍ مِنْكُمْ لِيُنْذِرَكُمْ وَلِتَتَّقُوا وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ٦٣فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَنْجَيْنَاهُ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ وَأَغْرَقْنَا الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا ۚ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْمًا عَمِينَ٦٤
63. "Do you wonder that there has come to you a Reminder from your Lord through a man from among you, that he may warn you, so that you may fear Allah and that you may receive (His) mercy'' 64. But they belied him, so We saved him and those along with him in the Fulk, and We drowned those who belied Our Ayat. They were indeed a blind people.) Allah said that Nuh proclaimed to his people,

﴿أَوَ عَجِبْتُمْ﴾
("Do you wonder...''), do not wonder because of this. Surely, it is not strange that Allah sends down revelation to a man among you as mercy, kindness and compassion for you, so that he warns you that you may avoid Allah's torment by associating none with Him,

﴿وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ﴾
("and that you may receive (His) mercy.'') Allah said,

﴿فَكَذَّبُوهُ﴾
(But they belied him) but they insisted on rejecting and opposing him, and only a few of them believed in him, as Allah stated in another Ayah. Allah said next,

﴿فَأَنجَيْنَـهُ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ﴾
(So We saved him and those along with him in the Fulk) the ark,

﴿وَأَغْرَقْنَا الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِـَايَـتِنَآ﴾
(And We drowned those who belied Our Ayat. ) Allah said in another Ayah,

﴿مِّمَّا خَطِيئَـتِهِمْ أُغْرِقُواْ فَأُدْخِلُواْ نَاراً فَلَمْ يَجِدُواْ لَهُمْ مِّن دُونِ اللَّهِ أَنصَاراً ﴾
(Because of their sins they were drowned, then they were admitted into the Fire. And they found none to help them instead of Allah.) ﴿71:25﴾ Allah said,

﴿إِنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ قَوْماً عَمِينَ﴾
(They were indeed a blind people.) meaning, blind from the Truth, unable to recognize it or find their way to it. Here, Allah said that He has taken revenge from His enemies and saved His Messenger and those who believed in him, while destroying their disbelieving enemies. Allah said in a another Ayah,

﴿إِنَّا لَنَنصُرُ رُسُلَنَا﴾
(Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our Messengers) ﴿40:51﴾. This is Allah's Sunnah (way) with His servants, in this life and the Hereafter, that the good end, victory and triumph is for those who fear Him. For example, Allah destroyed the people of Nuh, and saved Nuh and his believing followers. Ibn Wahb said that he was told that Ibn `Abbas said that eighty men were saved with Nuh in the ship, one of them was Jurhum, who spoke Arabic. Ibn Abi Hatim collected this statement, which was also narrated with a continuous chain of narration from Ibn `Abbas.