Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 98. Al-Baiyina, Ayaat 6 To 8

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ وَالْمُشْرِكِينَ فِي نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمْ شَرُّ الْبَرِيَّةِ٦إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمْ خَيْرُ الْبَرِيَّةِ٧جَزَاؤُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا ۖ رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ لِمَنْ خَشِيَ رَبَّهُ٨
6. Verily, those who disbelieve from among the People of the Scripture and idolators, will abide in the fire of Hell. They are the worst of creatures. 7. Verily, those who believe and do righteous good deeds, they are the best of creatures. 8. Their reward with their Lord is Eternal Gardens, underneath which rivers flow. They will abide therein forever, Allah will be pleased with them, and they well-pleased with Him. That is for him who fears his Lord.

Mentioning the Worse and Best of Creation and Their Recompense

Allah informs of what will happen to the wicked disbelievers among the People of the Scripture and the idolators who oppose the Allah's divinely revealed Books and the Prophets whom He sent. He says that they will be in the fire of Hell on the Day of Judgement and they will abide therein forever. This means that they will remain in it and they will have no way out of it and they will not cease being in it.

﴿أَوْلَـئِكَ هُمْ شَرُّ الْبَرِيَّةِ﴾
(They are the worst of creatures.) meaning, they are the worst creation that Allah has fashioned and created. Then Allah informs about the situation of the righteous people who believed in their hearts and performed righteous deeds with their bodies. He says that they are the best of creation. Abu Hurayrah and a group of the scholars have used this Ayah as a proof that the believers have a status among the creatures that is better than the angels. This is because Allah says,

﴿أُوْلَـئِكَ هُمْ خَيْرُ الْبَرِيَّةِ﴾
(They are the best of creatures.) Then Allah says,

﴿جَزَآؤُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ﴾
(Their reward with their Lord) meaning, on the Day of Judgement.

﴿جَنَّـتُ عَدْنٍ تَجْرِى مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الاٌّنْهَـرُ خَـلِدِينَ فِيهَآ أَبَداً﴾
(is Eternal Gardens underneath which rivers flow. They will abide therein forever,) meaning, having no end, no break and no conclusion.

﴿رِّضِىَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُواْ عَنْهُ﴾
(Allah will be pleased with them, and they well-pleased with Him.) The condition of Him being pleased with them is more illustri- ous than all of the everlasting delights that they will be given.

﴿وَرَضُواْ عَنْهُ﴾
(and they well-pleased with Him.) Due to the comprehensive favors He has given them. Then Allah says,

﴿ذَلِكَ لِمَنْ خَشِىَ رَبَّهُ﴾
(That is for him who fears his Lord.) meaning, this is the reward that will be attained by those who revere Allah and fear Him as He deserves to be feared. This is the person who worships Allah as if he sees Him, and he knows that even though he does not see Him, indeed Allah sees him. Imam Ahmad recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah said,

«أَلَا أُخْبِرُكُمْ بِخَيْرِ الْبَرِيَّةِ؟»
(Shall I not inform you of the best of creation) They said, "Of course, O Messenger of Allah!'' He said,

«رَجُلٌ آخِذٌ بِعِنَانِ فَرَسِهِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ، كُلَّمَا كَانَتْ هَيْعَةٌ اسْتَوَى عَلَيْهِ. أَلَا أُخْبِرُكُمْ بِخَيْرِ الْبَرِيَّة»
(A man who takes the reins of his horse in the way of Allah, and whenever there is a fearful cry from the enemy, he climbs upon it. Shall I not inform you of the best of creation) They said, "Of course, O Messenger of Allah!'' He said,

«رَجُلٌ فِي ثُلَّةٍ مِنْ غَنَمِهِ، يُقِيمُ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتِي الزَّكَاةَ. أَلَا أُخْبِرُكُمْ بِشَرِّ الْبَرِيَّةِ؟»
(A man who has a flock of sheep and he establishes the prayer and gives the obligatory charity. Shall I not inform you of the worst of creation) They said, "Of course.'' He said,

«الَّذِي يُسْأَلُ بِاللهِ وَلَا يُعْطِي بِه»
(The person who is asked by Allah and he does not give by Him.) This is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Lam Yakun (Al-Bayyinah), and all praise and thanks are due to Allah.