Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 78. An-Nabaa, Ayaat 31 To 36

إِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ مَفَازًا٣١حَدَائِقَ وَأَعْنَابًا٣٢وَكَوَاعِبَ أَتْرَابًا٣٣وَكَأْسًا دِهَاقًا٣٤لَا يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْوًا وَلَا كِذَّابًا٣٥جَزَاءً مِنْ رَبِّكَ عَطَاءً حِسَابًا٣٦
31. Verily, for those who have Taqwa, there will be a success; 32. Hada'iq and vineyards, 33. And Kawa`ib Atrab, 34. And a cup Dihaq. 35. No Laghw shall they hear therein, nor lying; 36. Rewarded from your Lord with a sufficient gift.

The Great Success will be for Those Who have Taqwa

Allah informs about the happy people and what He has prepared for them of esteem, and eternal pleasure. Allah says,

﴿إِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ مَفَازاً ﴾
(Verily, for those who have Taqwa, there will be a success;) Ibn `Abbas and Ad-Dahhak both said, "A place of enjoyable recreation.'' Mujahid and Qatadah both said, "They are successful and thus, they are saved from the Hellfire.'' The most obvious meaning here is the statement of Ibn `Abbas, because Allah says after this,

﴿حَدَآئِقَ﴾
(Hada'iq) And Hada'iq are gardens of palm trees and other things.

﴿حَدَآئِقَ وَأَعْنَـباً - وَكَوَاعِبَ أَتْرَاباً ﴾
(And vineyards, and Kawa`ib Atrab,) meaning, wide-eyed maidens with fully developed breasts. Ibn `Abbas, Mujahid and others have said,

﴿كَواعِبَ﴾
(Kawa`ib) "This means round breasts. They meant by this that the breasts of these girls will be fully rounded and not sagging, because they will be virgins, equal in age. This means that they will only have one age.'' The explanation of this has already been mentioned in Surat Al-Waqi`ah. Concerning Allah's statement,

﴿وَكَأْساً دِهَاقاً ﴾
(And a cup Dihaq.) Ibn `Abbas said, "Continuously filled.'' `Ikrimah said, "Pure.'' Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, and Ibn Zayd all said,

﴿دِهَاقاً﴾
(Dihaq) "This means completely filled.'' Then Allah says,

﴿لاَّ يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْواً وَلاَ كِذَباً ﴾
(No Laghw shall they hear therein, nor lying;) This is similar to Allah's statement,

﴿لاَّ لَغْوٌ فِيهَا وَلاَ تَأْثِيمٌ﴾
(Free from any Laghw, and free from sin.) (52:23) meaning, there will not be any vain, worthless speech therein, nor any sinful lying. Rather, it will be the abode of peace, and everything that is in it will be free of any shortcomings. Allah then says,

﴿جَزَآءً مِّن رَّبِّكَ عَطَآءً حِسَاباً ﴾
(Rewarded from your Lord with a sufficient gift.) meaning, `this that We have mentioned to you is what Allah will reward them with, and they will be given it by His favor and from Him. It will be a kindness, mercy, gift, and recompense from Him. It will be sufficient, suitable, comprehensive and abundant.' The Arabs say, "He gave me and he sufficed me.'' This means that he sufficiently provided for me.'' From this comes the saying, "Allah is sufficient for me.''