Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 12. Yusuf, Ayaat 21 To 22

وَقَالَ الَّذِي اشْتَرَاهُ مِنْ مِصْرَ لِامْرَأَتِهِ أَكْرِمِي مَثْوَاهُ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَنْفَعَنَا أَوْ نَتَّخِذَهُ وَلَدًا ۚ وَكَذَٰلِكَ مَكَّنَّا لِيُوسُفَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلِنُعَلِّمَهُ مِنْ تَأْوِيلِ الْأَحَادِيثِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ غَالِبٌ عَلَىٰ أَمْرِهِ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ٢١وَلَمَّا بَلَغَ أَشُدَّهُ آتَيْنَاهُ حُكْمًا وَعِلْمًا ۚ وَكَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ٢٢
21. And he (the man) from Egypt who bought him, said to his wife: "Make his stay comfortable, maybe he will profit us or we shall adopt him as a son.'' Thus did We establish Yusuf in the land, that We might teach him the interpretation of events. And Allah has full power and control over His affairs, but most of men know not. 22. And when he ﴿Yusuf﴾ attained his full manhood, We gave him wisdom and knowledge (the prophethood), thus We reward the doers of good.

Yusuf in Egypt

Allah mentions the favors that He granted Yusuf, peace be on him, by which He made the man from Egypt who bought him, take care of him and provide him with a comfortable life. He also ordered his wife to be kind to Yusuf and had good hopes for his future, because of his firm righteous behavior. He said to his wife,

﴿أَكْرِمِى مَثْوَاهُ عَسَى أَن يَنفَعَنَآ أَوْ نَتَّخِذَهُ وَلَدًا﴾
(Make his stay comfortable, maybe he will profit us or we shall adopt him as a son.) The man who bought Yusuf was the minister of Egypt at the time, and his title was `Aziz'. Abu Ishaq narrated that Abu `Ubaydah said that `Abdullah bin Mas`ud said, "Three had the most insight: the `Aziz of Egypt, who said to his wife,

﴿أَكْرِمِى مَثْوَاهُ﴾
(Make his stay comfortable...), the woman who said to her father,

﴿يأَبَتِ اسْتَـْجِرْهُ﴾
(O my father! Hire him...), ﴿28:26﴾ and Abu Bakr As-Siddiq when he appointed `Umar bin Al-Khattab to be the Khalifah after him, may Allah be pleased with them both.'' Allah said next that just as He saved Yusuf from his brothers,

﴿كَذَلِكَمَكَّنَّا لِيُوسُفَ فِى الاٌّرْضِ﴾
(Thus did We establish Yusuf in the land), in reference to Egypt,

﴿وَلِنُعَلِّمَهُ مِن تَأْوِيلِ الاٌّحَادِيثِ﴾
(that We might teach him the interpretation of events.) the interpretation of dreams, according to Mujahid and As-Suddi. Allah said next,

﴿وَاللَّهُ غَالِبٌ عَلَى أَمْرِهِ﴾
(And Allah has full power and control over His affairs,) if He wills something, then there is no averting His decision, nor can it ever be stopped or contradicted. Rather, Allah has full power over everything and everyone else. Sa`id bin Jubayr said while commenting on Allah's statement,

﴿وَاللَّهُ غَالِبٌ عَلَى أَمْرِهِ﴾
(And Allah has full power and control over His affairs,) "He does what ever He wills.'' Allah said,

﴿وَلَـكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ﴾
(but most of men know not.) meaning, have no knowledge of Allah's wisdom with regards to His creation, compassion and doing what He wills. Allah said next,

﴿وَلَمَّا بَلَغَ﴾
(And when he attained), in reference to Prophet Yusuf, peace be upon him,

﴿أَشُدَّهُ﴾
(his full manhood), sound in mind and perfect in body,

﴿آتَيْنَاهُ حُكْمًا وَعِلْمًا﴾
(We gave him wisdom and knowledge), which is the prophethood that Allah sent him with for the people he lived among,

﴿وَكَذَلِكَ نَجْزِى الْمُحْسِنِينَ﴾
(thus We reward the doers of good.) because Yusuf used to do good in the obedience of Allah the Exalted.