Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 12. Yusuf, Ayaat 63 To 64

فَلَمَّا رَجَعُوا إِلَىٰ أَبِيهِمْ قَالُوا يَا أَبَانَا مُنِعَ مِنَّا الْكَيْلُ فَأَرْسِلْ مَعَنَا أَخَانَا نَكْتَلْ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ٦٣قَالَ هَلْ آمَنُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ إِلَّا كَمَا أَمِنْتُكُمْ عَلَىٰ أَخِيهِ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ فَاللَّهُ خَيْرٌ حَافِظًا ۖ وَهُوَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ٦٤
63. So, when they returned to their father, they said: "O our father! No more measure of grain shall we get (unless we take our brother). So send our brother with us, and we shall get our measure and truly, we will guard him.'' 64. He said: "Can I entrust him to you except as I entrusted his brother ﴿Yusuf﴾ to you aforetime But Allah is the Best to guard, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy.''

Yusuf's Brothers ask Ya`qub's Permission to send Their Brother Binyamin with Them to Egypt

Allah says that when they went back to their father,

﴿قَالُواْ يأَبَانَا مُنِعَ مِنَّا الْكَيْلُ﴾
(they said: "O our father! No more measure of grain shall we get...'') `after this time, unless you send our brother Binyamin with us. So send him with us, and we shall get our measure and we shall certainly guard him.' Some scholars read this Ayah in a way that means, `and he shall get his ration.' They said,

﴿وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَـفِظُونَ﴾
(and truly, we will guard him.), `do not fear for his safety, for he will be returned back to you.' This is what they said to Ya`qub about their brother Yusuf,

﴿أَرْسِلْهُ مَعَنَا غَداً يَرْتَعْ وَيَلْعَبْ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَـفِظُونَ ﴾
("Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play, and verily, we will take care of him.'') ﴿12:12﴾ This is why Prophet Ya`qub said to them,

﴿هَلْ آمَنُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ إِلاَّ كَمَآ أَمِنتُكُمْ عَلَى أَخِيهِ مِن قَبْلُ﴾
(Can I entrust him to you except as I entrusted his brother ﴿Yusuf﴾ to you aforetime) He asked them, `Will you do to him except what you did to his brother Yusuf before, when you took him away from me and separated me from him'

﴿فَاللَّهُ خَيْرٌ حَـفِظًا﴾
﴿وَهُوَ أَرْحَمُ الرَحِمِينَ﴾
(But Allah is the Best to guard, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy.) Ya`qub said, `Allah has the most mercy with me among all those who show mercy, He is compassionate with me for my old age, feebleness and eagerness for my son. I invoke Allah to return him to me, and to allow him and I to be together; for surely, He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy.'