Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 6. Al-An'am, Ayaat 46 To 49

قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَخَذَ اللَّهُ سَمْعَكُمْ وَأَبْصَارَكُمْ وَخَتَمَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِكُمْ مَنْ إِلَٰهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ يَأْتِيكُمْ بِهِ ۗ انْظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الْآيَاتِ ثُمَّ هُمْ يَصْدِفُونَ٤٦قُلْ أَرَأَيْتَكُمْ إِنْ أَتَاكُمْ عَذَابُ اللَّهِ بَغْتَةً أَوْ جَهْرَةً هَلْ يُهْلَكُ إِلَّا الْقَوْمُ الظَّالِمُونَ٤٧وَمَا نُرْسِلُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلَّا مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنْذِرِينَ ۖ فَمَنْ آمَنَ وَأَصْلَحَ فَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ٤٨وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا يَمَسُّهُمُ الْعَذَابُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَفْسُقُونَ٤٩
46. Say: "Tell me, if Allah took away your hearing and your sight, and sealed up your hearts, is there a god other than Allah who could restore them to you'' See how variously We explain the Ayat, yet they turn aside. 47. Say: "Tell me, if the punishment of Allah comes to you suddenly, or openly, will any be destroyed except the wrongdoing people'' 48. And We send not the Messengers but as givers of glad tidings and as warners. So whosoever believes and does righteous good deeds, upon such shall come no fear, nor shall they grieve. 49. But those who reject Our Ayat, the torment will strike them for their rebelling.) Allah said to His Messenger, say, O Muhammad , to those rebellious liars,

﴿أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَخَذَ اللَّهُ سَمْعَكُمْ وَأَبْصَـرَكُمْ﴾
(Tell me, if Allah took away your hearing and your sight.) just as He gave these senses to you. In another Ayah, Allah said;

﴿هُوَ الَّذِى أَنشَأَكُمْ وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالاٌّبْصَـرَ﴾
(It is He Who has created you, and endowed you with hearing, seeing.) ﴿67:23﴾. The Ayah above might also mean that Allah will not allow the disbelievers to benefit from these senses in religious terms. This is why He said next,

﴿وَخَتَمَ عَلَى قُلُوبِكُمْ﴾
(and sealed up your hearts,.) He also said in other Ayat,

﴿أَمَّن يَمْلِكُ السَّمْعَ والاٌّبْصَـرَ﴾
(Or who owns hearing and sight) ﴿10:31﴾, and,

﴿وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَحُولُ بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَقَلْبِهِ﴾
(And know that Allah comes in between a person and his heart.) Allah said;

﴿مَّنْ إِلَـهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ يَأْتِيكُمْ بِهِ﴾
(Is there a god other than Allah who could restore them to you) Meaning, is there anyone except Allah who is able to give you back these senses if Allah took them from you Only Allah is able to do so, and this is why He said here,

﴿انْظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الاٌّيَـتِ﴾
(See how variously We explain the Ayat,) and make them plain and clear, testifying to Allah's Oneness in lordship and that those worshipped besides Him are all false and unworthy.

﴿ثُمَّ هُمْ يَصْدِفُونَ﴾
(yet they turn aside.) After this explanation, they still turn away from the truth and hinder people from following it. Allah's statement,

﴿قُلْ أَرَأَيْتَكُمْ إِنْ أَتَـكُمْ عَذَابُ اللَّهِ بَغْتَةً﴾
(Say: "Tell me, if the punishment of Allah comes to you suddenly...'') means, while you are unaware -- or during the night -- striking you all of a sudden,

﴿أَوْ جَهْرَةً﴾
(or openly) during the day, or publicly,

﴿هَلْ يُهْلَكُ إِلاَّ الْقَوْمُ الظَّـلِمُونَ﴾
(will any be destroyed except the wrongdoing people) This torment only strikes those who commit injustice against themselves by associating others with Allah, while those who worship Allah alone without partners will be saved from it, and they will have no fear or sorrow. In another Ayah, Allah said;

﴿الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَلَمْ يَلْبِسُواْ إِيمَـنَهُمْ بِظُلْمٍ﴾
(It is those who believe and confuse not their belief with Zulm, (wrong or Shirk).) ﴿6:82﴾ Allah's statement,

﴿وَمَا نُرْسِلُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلاَّ مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنذِرِينَ﴾
(And We send not the Messengers but as bearers of glad tidings and as warners.) means, the Messengers bring good news to Allah's servants, as well as, command all that is good and righteous. They also warn those who disbelieve in Allah of His anger and of all types of torment. Allah said,

﴿فَمَنْ ءَامَنَ وَأَصْلَحَ﴾
(So whosoever believes and does righteous good deeds.) meaning, whoever believes in his heart with what the Messengers were sent with and makes his works righteous by imitating them;

﴿فَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ﴾
(upon such shall come no fear,) concerning the future,

﴿وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ﴾
(nor shall they grieve.) about what they missed in the past and left behind them in this world. Certainly, Allah will be the Wali and Protector over what they left behind. Allah said next,

﴿وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِـَايَـتِنَا يَمَسُّهُمُ الْعَذَابُ بِمَا كَانُواْ يَفْسُقُونَ ﴾
(But those who reject Our Ayat, the torment will strike them for their rebelling.) The torment will strike them because of disbelieving in the Message of the Messengers, defying Allah's commands, committing what He prohibited and transgressing His set limits.