Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 6. Al-An'am, Ayaat 106 To 107

اتَّبِعْ مَا أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۖ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ١٠٦وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ مَا أَشْرَكُوا ۗ وَمَا جَعَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظًا ۖ وَمَا أَنْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِوَكِيلٍ١٠٧
106. Follow what has been inspired (revealed) to you from your Lord, none has the right to be worshipped but He, and turn aside from the idolators. 107. Had Allah willed, they would not have taken others besides Him in worship. And We have not made you Hafiz over them nor are you set over them to dispose of their affairs.

The Command to Follow the Revelation

Allah commands His Messenger and those who followed his path,

﴿اتَّبِعْ مَآ أُوحِىَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ﴾
(Follow what has been inspired to you from your Lord,) meaning, follow it, obey it and act according to it. What has been revealed to you from your Lord is the Truth, no doubt, and there is no deity worthy of worship except Him,

﴿وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ﴾
(and turn aside from the idolators) meaning, forgive them, be forbearing and endure their harm until Allah brings relief to you, supports you and makes you triumphant over them. Know -- O Muhammad -- that there is a wisdom behind misleading the idolators, and that had Allah willed, He would have directed all people to guidance,

﴿وَلَوْ شَآءَ اللَّهُ مَآ أَشْرَكُواْ﴾
(Had Allah willed, they would not have taken others besides Him in worship.) Allah's is the perfect will and wisdom in all decrees and decisions, and He is never questioned about what He does, while they all will be questioned. Allah's statement,

﴿وَمَا جَعَلْنَـكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظاً﴾
(And We have not made you Hafiz over them.) means, a watcher who observes their statements and deeds,

﴿وَمَآ أَنتَ عَلَيْهِم بِوَكِيلٍ﴾
(Nor are you set over them to dispose of their affairs. ) or to control their provision. Rather, your only job is to convey, just as Allah said,

﴿فَذَكِّرْ إِنَّمَآ أَنتَ مُذَكِّرٌ - لَّسْتَ عَلَيْهِم بِمُسَيْطِرٍ ﴾
(So remind them, you are only one who reminds. You are not a dictator over them.) ﴿88:21-22﴾ and,

﴿فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَـغُ وَعَلَيْنَا الْحِسَابُ﴾
(Your duty is only to convey and on Us is the reckoning.) ﴿13:40﴾