Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 24. An-Nur, Ayaat 41 To 42

أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَالطَّيْرُ صَافَّاتٍ ۖ كُلٌّ قَدْ عَلِمَ صَلَاتَهُ وَتَسْبِيحَهُ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِمَا يَفْعَلُونَ٤١وَلِلَّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ وَإِلَى اللَّهِ الْمَصِيرُ٤٢
41. See you not that Allah, He it is Whom glorify whosoever is in the heavens and the earth, and the birds with wings outspread Of each one He knows indeed his Salah and his glorification; and Allah is All-Aware of what they do. 42. And to Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and to Allah is the return.

Everything glorifies Allah, may He be exalted, and to Him belongs the Sovereignty

Allah tells us that whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth, i.e., the angels, mankind, Jinn, animals and even inanimate objects, all glorify Him. This is like the Ayah:

﴿تُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّمَـوَتُ السَّبْعُ وَالاٌّرْضُ وَمَن فِيهِنَّ﴾
(The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein, glorify Him) ﴿17:44﴾,

﴿وَالطَّيْرُ صَآفَّـتٍ﴾
(and the birds with wings outspread) means, while they are flying they glorify their Lord and worship Him with the glorification with which they are inspired and to which they are guided. Allah knows what they are doing, and so He says:

﴿كُلٌّ قَدْ عَلِمَ صَلاَتَهُ وَتَسْبِيحَهُ﴾
(Of each one He knows indeed his Salah and his glorification;) meaning, He has guided every creature to its own way of worshipping Allah, may He be glorified. Then Allah tells us that He knows all of that and nothing at all is hidden from Him. He says:

﴿وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِمَا يَفْعَلُونَ﴾
(and Allah is All-Aware of what they do.) Then Allah tells us that to Him belongs the sovereignty of heaven and earth, and that He is the Ruler and Controller, the God Who is worshipped and besides Whom none other is to be worshipped, and there is none to put back His judgement.

﴿وَإِلَى اللَّهِ الْمَصِيرُ﴾
(and to Allah is the return) means, on the Day of Resurrection, when He will judge as He wills,

﴿لِيَجْزِىَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُواْ بِمَا عَمِلُواْ﴾
(that He may requite those who do evil with that which they have done...) ﴿53:31﴾ He is the Creator and Sovereign, and His is indeed the Authority in this world and the next. To Him be praise at the beginning and in the end.