Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 113. Al-Falaq, Introduction

Introduction to Al_Falaq
Which was revealed in Makkah

The Position of Ibn Mas`ud concerning Al-Mu`awwidhatayn

Imam Ahmad recorded from Zirr bin Hubaysh that Ubayy bin Ka`b told him that Ibn Mas`ud did not record the Mu`awwidhatayn in his Mushaf (copy of the Qur'an). So Ubayy said, "I testify that the Messenger of Allah informed me that Jibril said to him,

﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ ﴾
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of Al-Falaq.'')(113:1) So he said it. And Jibril said to him,

﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ ﴾
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind.'') (114:1) So he said it. Therefore, we say what the Prophet said.''

The Virtues of Surahs Al-Falaq and An-Nas

In his Sahih, Muslim recorded on the authority of `Uqbah bin `Amir that the Messenger of Allah said,

«أَلَمْ تَرَ آيَاتٍ أُنْزِلَتْ هَذِهِ اللَّيْلَةَ لَمْ يُرَ مِثْلُهُنَّ قَطُّ:
(Do you not see that there have been Ayat revealed to me tonight the like of which has not been seen before) They are

﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ ﴾»
(Say: "I seek refuge with, the Lord of Al-Falaq.'')(113:1) and;

﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ ﴾
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind.'') (114:1)) This Hadith was recorded by Ahmad, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i. At-Tirmidhi said, "Hasan Sahih.''

Another Narration

Imam Ahmad recorded from `Uqbah bin `Amir that he said, "While I was leading the Messenger of Allah along one of these paths he said,

«يَا عُقْبَةُ أَلَا تَرْكَبُ؟»
(O `Uqbah! Will you not ride) I was afraid that this might be considered an act of disobedience. So the Messenger of Allah got down and I rode for a while. Then he rode. Then he said,

«يَا عُقْبَةُ، أَلَا أُعَلِّمُكَ سُورَتَيْنِ مِنْ خَيْرِ سُورَتَيْنِ قَرَأَ بِهِمَا النَّاسُ؟»
(O `Uqbah! Should I not teach you two Surahs that are of the best two Surahs that the people recite) I said, `Of course, O Messenger of Allah.' So he taught me to recite

﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ ﴾
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of Al-Falaq.'') (113:1) and

﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ ﴾
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind.'') (114:1) Then the call was given to begin the prayer and the Messenger of Allah went forward (to lead the people), and he recited them in the prayer. Afterwards he passed by me and said,

«كَيْفَ رَأَيْتَ يَا عُقَيْبُ، اقْرَأْ بِهِمَا كُلَّمَا نِمْتَ وَكُلَّمَا قُمْتَ»
(What do you think, O `Uqayb Recite these two Surahs whenever you go to sleep and whenever you get up.)''

An-Nasa'i and Abu Dawud both recorded this Hadith.

Another Narration

«إِنَّ النَّاسَ لَمْ يَتَعَوَّذُوا بِمِثْلِ هَذَيْنِ:
(Verily, the people do not seek protection with anything like these two:

﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ ﴾
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of Al-Falaq.'')(113:1) and;

﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ ﴾»
(Say: "I seek refuge with (Allah) the Lord of mankind.'')) (114:1)

Another Narration

An-Nasa'i recorded that `Uqbah bin `Amir said, "I was walking with the Messenger of Allah when he said,

«يَا عُقْبَةُ قُلْ»
(O `Uqbah! Say!) I replied, `What should I say' So he was silent and did not respond to me. Then he said,

«قُلْ»
(Say!) I replied, `What should I say, O Messenger of Allah' He said,

«﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ ﴾»
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of Al-Falaq.'') So, I recited it until I reached its end. Then he said,

«قُلْ»
(Say!) I replied, `What should I say O Messenger of Allah' He said,

«﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ ﴾»
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind.'') So, I recited it until I reached its end. Then the Messenger of Allah said,

«مَا سَأَلَ سَائِلٌ بِمِثْلِهَا، وَلَا اسْتَعَاذَ مُسْتَعِيذٌ بِمِثْلِهَا»
(No person beseeches with anything like these, and no person seeks refuge with anything like these.)''

Another Hadith

An-Nasa'i recorded that Ibn `Abis Al-Juhani said that the Prophet said to him,

«يَا ابْنَ عَابِسٍ أَلَا أَدُلُّكَ أَوْ أَلَا أُخْبِرُكَ بِأَفْضَلِ مَا يَتَعَوَّذُ بِهِ الْمُتَعَوِّذُونَ؟»
(O Ibn `Abis! Shall I guide you to -- or inform you -- of the best thing that those who seek protection use for protection) He replied, "Of course, O Messenger of Allah!'' The Prophet said,

«﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ ﴾
﴿قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ ﴾
هَاتَانِ السُّورَتَانِ»
(Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of Al-Falaq.'')( and (Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind.'')( These two Surahs (are the best protection).) Imam Malik recorded from `A'ishah that whenever the Messenger of Allah was suffering from an ailment, he would recite the Mu`awwidhatayn over himself and blow (over himself). Then if his pain became severe, `A'ishah said that she would recite the Mu`awwidhatayn over him and take his hand and wipe it over himself seeking the blessing of those Surahs. Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah all recorded this Hadith.

It has been reported from Abu Sa`id that the Messenger of Allah used to seek protection against the evil eyes of the Jinns and mankind. But when the Mu`awwi- dhatayn were revea- led, he used them (for protection) and aban- doned all else besides them. At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah recorded this. At-Tirmidhi said, "This Hadith is Hasan Sahih.''

﴿بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.