Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 17. Al-Israa, Ayaat 18 To 19

مَنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعَاجِلَةَ عَجَّلْنَا لَهُ فِيهَا مَا نَشَاءُ لِمَنْ نُرِيدُ ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَا لَهُ جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَاهَا مَذْمُومًا مَدْحُورًا١٨وَمَنْ أَرَادَ الْآخِرَةَ وَسَعَىٰ لَهَا سَعْيَهَا وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَأُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ سَعْيُهُمْ مَشْكُورًا١٩
18. Whoever desires the quick-passing (transitory enjoyment of this world), We readily grant him what We will for whom We like. Then, afterwards, We have appointed for him Hell; he will burn therein disgraced and rejected. 19. And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it, with the necessary effort due for it while he is a believer, then such are the ones whose striving shall be appreciated, (rewarded by Allah).

The Reward of Those who desire this World and Those who desire the Hereafter

Allah tells us that not everyone who desires this world and its luxuries gets what he wants. That is attained by those whom Allah wants to have it, and they get what He wills that they should get. This Ayah narrows down the general statements made in other Ayat. Allah says:

﴿عَجَّلْنَا لَهُ فِيهَا مَا نَشَآءُ لِمَن نُّرِيدُ ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَا لَهُ جَهَنَّمَ﴾
(We readily grant him what We will for whom We like. Then, afterwards, We have appointed for him Hell) meaning, in the Hereafter,

﴿يَصْلَـهَآ﴾
(he will burn therein) means, he will enter it until it covers him on all sides,

﴿مَذْمُومًا﴾
(disgraced) means, blamed for his bad behaviour and evil deeds, because he chose the transient over the eternal,

﴿مَّدْحُورًا﴾
(rejected.) means, far away (from Allah's mercy), humiliated and put to shame.

﴿وَمَنْ أَرَادَ الاٌّخِرَةَ﴾
(And whoever desires the Hereafter) wanting the Hereafter and its blessings and delights,

﴿وَسَعَى لَهَا سَعْيَهَا﴾
(and strives for it, with the necessary effort due for it) seeking it in the right way, which is following the Messenger .

﴿وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ﴾
(while he is a believer,) means, his heart has faith, i.e., he believes in the reward and punishment,

﴿فَأُولَـئِكَ كَانَ سَعْيُهُم مَّشْكُورًا﴾
(then such are the ones whose striving shall be appreciated, (rewarded by Allah).)