Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 38. Sad, Ayaat 65 To 70

قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَنَا مُنْذِرٌ ۖ وَمَا مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ إِلَّا اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ٦٥رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفَّارُ٦٦قُلْ هُوَ نَبَأٌ عَظِيمٌ٦٧أَنْتُمْ عَنْهُ مُعْرِضُونَ٦٨مَا كَانَ لِيَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ بِالْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَىٰ إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ٦٩إِنْ يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ إِلَّا أَنَّمَا أَنَا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ٧٠
65. Say: "I am only a warner and there is no God (worthy of worship) except Allah the One, the Irresistible,'' 66. "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving.'' 67. Say: "That is a great news,'' 68. "From which you turn away!'' 69. "I had no knowledge of the chiefs (angels) on high when they were disputing and discussing.'' 70. "Only this has been revealed to me, that I am a plain warner.''

The Message of the Messenger is a Great News

Allah tells His Messenger to say to those who disbelieved in Allah, associated others in worship with Him and denied His Messenger: `I am a warner, I am not as you claim.'

﴿وَمَا مِنْ إِلَـهٍ إِلاَّ اللَّهُ الْوَحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ﴾
(and there is no God (worthy of worship) except Allah, the One, the Irresistible,) means, He Alone has subjugated and controlled everything.

﴿رَّبُّ السَّمَـوَتِ وَالاٌّرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا﴾
(The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them,) means, He is the Sovereign of all that and is in control of it.

﴿الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفَّارُ﴾
(the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving.) means, He is Oft-Forgiving as well as being Almighty and All-Powerful.

﴿قُلْ هُوَ نَبَأٌ عَظِيمٌ ﴾
(Say: "That (this Qur'an) is a great news,'') means, `something very important, which is that Allah has sent me to you.

﴿أَنتُمْ عَنْهُ مُعْرِضُونَ ﴾
(From which you turn away!) means, `you neglect it.'

﴿مَا كَانَ لِىَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ بِالْمَـَلإِ الاٌّعْلَى إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ ﴾
(I had no knowledge of the chiefs (angels) on high when they were disputing and discussing. ) meaning, `were it not for the divine revelation, how could I have known about the dispute of the chiefs on high (the angels)' This refers to their dispute concerning Adam, peace be upon him, and how Iblis refused to prostrate to him and argued with his Lord because He preferred him (Adam) over him. This is what Allah says: