Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 38. Sad, Ayaat 49 To 54

هَٰذَا ذِكْرٌ ۚ وَإِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ لَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ٤٩جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ مُفَتَّحَةً لَهُمُ الْأَبْوَابُ٥٠مُتَّكِئِينَ فِيهَا يَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِفَاكِهَةٍ كَثِيرَةٍ وَشَرَابٍ٥١۞ وَعِنْدَهُمْ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ أَتْرَابٌ٥٢هَٰذَا مَا تُوعَدُونَ لِيَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ٥٣إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَرِزْقُنَا مَا لَهُ مِنْ نَفَادٍ٥٤
49. And verily, for those who have Taqwa is a good final return. 50. `Adn Paradise, whose doors will be opened for them. 51. Therein they will recline; therein they will call for fruits in abundance and drinks; 52. And beside them will be Qasirat-at-Tarf, (and) of equal ages. 53. This it is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning! 54. (It will be said to them)! Verily, this is Our provision which will never finish.

The Final Return of the Blessed

Allah tells us that His blessed, believing servants will have a good final return in the Hereafter, which means their ultimate destination. Then He explains it further, as He says:

﴿جَنَّـتِ عَدْنٍ﴾
(`Adn Gardens) meaning, eternal gardens (of Paradise),

﴿مُّفَتَّحَةً لَّهُمُ الاٌّبْوَابُ﴾
(whose doors will be opened for them.) means, when they come to them (these gardens), their gates will open for them.

﴿مُّتَّكِئِينَ فِيهَا﴾
(Therein they will recline;) It was said that this means that they will sit cross-legged on chairs beneath canopies.

﴿يَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِفَـكِهَةٍ كَثِيرَةٍ﴾
(therein they will call for fruits in abundance) means, whatever they ask for, they will find it, and it will be prepared just as they wanted it.

﴿وَشَرَابٌ﴾
(and drinks;) means, whatever kind of drink they want, the servants will bring it to them,

﴿بِأَكْوَابٍ وَأَبَارِيقَ وَكَأْسٍ مِّن مَّعِينٍ ﴾
(With cups, and jugs, and a glass of flowing wine.) (56: 18).

﴿وَعِندَهُمْ قَـصِرَتُ الطَّرْفِ﴾
(And beside them will be Qasirat-at-Tarf (chaste females)) means, they restrain their glances from anyone except their husbands, and do not turn to anyone else.

﴿أَتْرَابٌ﴾
((and) of equal ages.) means, they will all be of the same age. This is the understanding of Ibn `Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Sa`id bin Jubayr, Muhammad bin Ka`b and As-Suddi.

﴿هَـذَا مَا تُوعَدُونَ لِيَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ ﴾
(This it is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning!) means, `this that We have mentioned of the features of Paradise is what He has prepared for His pious servants who will reach it after they have been resurrected from their graves and been saved from the Fire.' Then Allah tells us that Paradise will never come to an end or disappear or cease to be. He says:

﴿إِنَّ هَـذَا لَرِزْقُنَا مَا لَهُ مِن نَّفَادٍ ﴾
(Verily, this is Our provision which will never finish.) This is like the Ayat:

﴿مَا عِندَكُمْ يَنفَدُ وَمَا عِندَ اللَّهِ بَاقٍ﴾
(Whatever is with you, will be exhausted, and whatever is with Allah will remain) (16:96).

﴿عَطَآءً غَيْرَ مَجْذُوذٍ﴾
(a gift without an end.) (11:108)

﴿لَهُمْ أَجْرٌ غَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ﴾
(for them is a reward that will never come to an end.) (84:25).

﴿أُكُلُهَا دَآئِمٌ وِظِلُّهَا تِلْكَ عُقْبَى الَّذِينَ اتَّقَواْ وَّعُقْبَى الْكَـفِرِينَ النَّارُ﴾
(its provision is eternal and so is its shade; this is the end of those who have Taqwa, and the end (final destination) of the disbelievers is Fire.)(13:35). And there are many similar Ayat.