Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 4. An-Nisaa, Ayaat 53 To 55

أَمْ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِنَ الْمُلْكِ فَإِذًا لَا يُؤْتُونَ النَّاسَ نَقِيرًا٥٣أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَىٰ مَا آتَاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ ۖ فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مُلْكًا عَظِيمًا٥٤فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ آمَنَ بِهِ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ صَدَّ عَنْهُ ۚ وَكَفَىٰ بِجَهَنَّمَ سَعِيرًا٥٥
53. Or have they a share in the dominion Then in that case they would not give mankind even a Naqir. 54. Or do they envy men for what Allah has given them of His bounty Then, We have already given the family of Ibrahim the Book and Al-Hikmah, and conferred upon them a great kingdom. 55. Of them were (some) who believed in it, and of them were (some) who rejected it; and enough is Hell for burning (them).

The Envy and Miserly Conduct of the Jews

Allah asked the Jews if they have a share in the dominion. That is merely a statement of rebuke, since they do not have any share in the dominion. Allah then described them as misers,

﴿فَإِذاً لاَّ يُؤْتُونَ النَّاسَ نَقِيراً﴾
(Then in that case they would not give mankind even a Naqir.) Meaning, if they had a share in the sovereignty and dominion, they would not give anyone anything, especially Muhammad , even if it was the speck on the back of a date-stone, which is the meaning of Naqir according to Ibn `Abbas and the majority of the scholars. This Ayah is similar to another of Allah's statements,

﴿قُل لَّوْ أَنتُمْ تَمْلِكُونَ خَزَآئِنَ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّى إِذًا لأمْسَكْتُمْ خَشْيَةَ الإِنفَاقِ﴾
(Say: "If you possessed the treasure of the mercy of my Lord, then you would surely withold it out of fear of spending it.) meaning, for fear that what you have might end, although there is no such possibility here. This only demonstrates their greedy and stingy nature. This is why Allah said,

﴿وَكَانَ الإنْسَـنُ قَتُورًا﴾
(And man is ever Qatur) meaning Bakhil (stingy). Allah then said,

﴿أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَى مَآ ءَاتَـهُمُ اللَّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ﴾
(Or do they envy men for what Allah has given them of His Bounty) referring to their envy of the Prophet for the great prophethood that Allah entrusted him with. Their envy made them reject him, because he was an Arab and not from the Children of Israel. At-Tabarani recorded that Ibn `Abbas said that,

﴿أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ﴾
(Or do they envy men) means, "We are the worthy people, rather than the rest of the people.'' Allah said,

﴿فَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَآ ءَالَ إِبْرَهِيمَ الْكِتَـبَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَءَاتَيْنَـهُمْ مُّلْكاً عَظِيماً﴾
(Then, We have already given the family of Ibrahim the Book and Al-Hikmah, and conferred upon them a great kingdom.) meaning, We gave the prophethood to the tribes of the Children of Israel, who are among the offspring of Ibrahim and sent down the Books to them. These Prophets ruled the Jews with the prophetic tradition, and We made kings among them. Yet,

﴿فَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ ءَامَنَ بِهِ﴾
(Of them were (some) who believed in it;) referring to Allah's favor and bounty (Prophets, Books, kingship),

﴿وَمِنْهُمْ مَّن صَدَّ عَنْهُ﴾
(and of them were (some) who rejected it) by disbelieving in it, ignoring it, and hindering the people from its path, although this bounty was from and for them, the Children of Israel. They disputed with their own Prophets; so what about you, O Muhammad , especially since you are not from the Children of Israel Mujahid said,

﴿فَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ ءَامَنَ بِهِ﴾
(Of them were (some) who believed in ﴿him﴾,) "Muhammad ,

﴿وَمِنْهُمْ مَّن صَدَّ عَنْهُ﴾
(and of them were (some) who rejected ﴿him﴾.)'' Therefore, O Muhammad, the rejection of you because of their disbelief is even more severe and they are even further from the truth that you brought them. This is why Allah threatened them,

﴿وَكَفَى بِجَهَنَّمَ سَعِيراً﴾
(and enough is Hell for burning (them).), meaning, the Fire is a just punishment for them because of their disbelief, rebellion and defiance of Allah's Books and Messengers.