Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 4. An-Nisaa, Ayaat 26 To 28

يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُبَيِّنَ لَكُمْ وَيَهْدِيَكُمْ سُنَنَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ وَيَتُوبَ عَلَيْكُمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ٢٦وَاللَّهُ يُرِيدُ أَنْ يَتُوبَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَيُرِيدُ الَّذِينَ يَتَّبِعُونَ الشَّهَوَاتِ أَنْ تَمِيلُوا مَيْلًا عَظِيمًا٢٧يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ أَنْ يُخَفِّفَ عَنْكُمْ ۚ وَخُلِقَ الْإِنْسَانُ ضَعِيفًا٢٨
26. Allah wishes to make clear (what is lawful and what is unlawful) to you, and to show you the ways of those before you, and accept your repentance, and Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise. 27. Allah wishes to accept your repentance, but those who follow their lusts, wish that you (believers) should deviate tremendously away (from the right path) 28. Allah wishes to lighten (the burden) for you; and man was created weak. ) Allah explains to the believers what He has allowed and prohibited for them in this and other Surahs,

﴿وَيَهْدِيَكُمْ سُنَنَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ﴾
(And to show you the ways of those before you,) meaning their righteous ways and how to adhere to the commandments that He likes and is pleased with.

﴿وَيَتُوبَ عَلَيْكُمْ﴾
(and accept your repentance) from sin and error,

﴿وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ﴾
(and Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise.) in His commands, decrees, actions and statements. Allah's statement,

﴿وَيُرِيدُ الَّذِينَ يَتَّبِعُونَ الشَّهَوَتِ أَن تَمِيلُواْ مَيْلاً عَظِيماً﴾
(but those who follow their lusts, wish that you (believers) should deviate tremendously away from the right path)) indicates that the followers of Shaytan among the Jews, Christians and the adulterous, wish that you would take the horrendous path of falsehood instead of the truth.

﴿يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ أَن يُخَفِّفَ عَنْكُمْ﴾
(Allah wishes to lighten (the burden) for you'') His legislation, orders, what He prohibits and what He decrees for you. This is why Allah has allowed free men to marry slave girls under certain conditions, as Mujahid and others have stated.

﴿وَخُلِقَ الإِنسَـنُ ضَعِيفاً﴾
(and man was created weak.) and this is why it is suitable in his case that the commands are made easy for him, because of his weakness and feebleness. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Tawus said that,

﴿وَخُلِقَ الإِنسَـنُ ضَعِيفاً﴾
(and man was created weak), "Concerning women''. Waki` said, "Man's mind leaves when women are involved.''