Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 88. Al-Gashiya, Ayaat 8 To 16

وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ نَاعِمَةٌ٨لِسَعْيِهَا رَاضِيَةٌ٩فِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ١٠لَا تَسْمَعُ فِيهَا لَاغِيَةً١١فِيهَا عَيْنٌ جَارِيَةٌ١٢فِيهَا سُرُرٌ مَرْفُوعَةٌ١٣وَأَكْوَابٌ مَوْضُوعَةٌ١٤وَنَمَارِقُ مَصْفُوفَةٌ١٥وَزَرَابِيُّ مَبْثُوثَةٌ١٦
8. Faces that Day will be joyful, 9. Glad with their endeavor. 10. In a lofty Paradise. 11. Where they shall neither hear harmful speech nor falsehood. 12. Therein will be a running spring. 13. Therein will be thrones raised high. 14. And cups set at hand. 15. And Namariq, set in rows. 16. And Zarabi, spread out (Mabthuthah).

The Condition of the People of Paradise on the Day of Judgement

After mentioning the situation of the wretched people, Allah changes the discussion to mention those who will be happy. He says,

﴿وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ﴾
(Faces that Day.) meaning, on the Day of Judgement.

﴿نَّاعِمَةٌ﴾
(will be joyful,) meaning, pleasure will be noticeable in them (those faces). This will only occur due to their striving. Sufyan said,

﴿لِّسَعْيِهَا رَاضِيَةٌ ﴾
(Glad with their endeavor.) "They will be pleased with their deeds.'' Then Allah says,

﴿فِى جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ ﴾
(In a lofty Paradise.) meaning, elevated and brilliant, secure in their dwellings.

﴿لاَّ تَسْمَعُ فِيهَا لَـغِيَةً ﴾
(Where they shall neither hear harmful speech nor falsehood.) meaning, they will not hear in the Paradise that they will be in, any foolish word. This is as Allah says,

﴿لاَّ يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْواً إِلاَّ سَلَـماً﴾
(They shall not hear therein any Laghw, but only Salam.) (19:62) Allah also says,

﴿لاَّ لَغْوٌ فِيهَا وَلاَ تَأْثِيمٌ﴾
(Free from any Laghw, and free from sin.) (52:23) and He says,

﴿لاَ يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْواً وَلاَ تَأْثِيماً - إِلاَّ قِيلاً سَلَـماً سَلَـماً ﴾
(No Laghw will they hear therein, nor any sinful speech. But only the saying of: "Salam! Salam!'' ) (56:25-26) Then Allah continues,

﴿فِيهَا عَيْنٌ جَارِيَةٌ ﴾
(Therein will be a running spring.) meaning, flowing freely. This is mentioned with the intent of emphasizing affirmation. It is not intended to mean that there is only one spring. So here it refers to springs collectively. Thus, the meaning is that in it (Paradise) are flowing springs. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah said,

«أَنْهَارُ الْجَنَّةِ تَفَجَّرُ مِنْ تَحْتِ تِلَالِ أَوْ مِنْ تَحْتِ جِبَالِ الْمِسْك»
(The rivers of Paradise spring forth from beneath hills -- or mountains -- of musk.)

﴿فِيهَا سُرُرٌ مَّرْفُوعَةٌ ﴾
(Therein will be thrones raised high.) meaning, lofty, delightful, numerous couches, with elevated ceilings. Upon which will be seated wide-eyed, beautiful maidens. They have mentioned that whenever the friend of Allah wishes to sit on these lofty thrones, they (the thrones) will lower themselves for him.

﴿وَأَكْوَابٌ مَّوْضُوعَةٌ ﴾
(And cups set at hand.) meaning, drinking containers that are prepared and presented for whoever among their masters (i.e., the people of Paradise) wants them.

﴿وَنَمَارِقُ مَصْفُوفَةٌ ﴾
(And Namariq set in rows.) Ibn `Abbas said, "An-Namariq are pillows.'' This was also said by `Ikrimah, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri and others. Concerning Allah's statement,

﴿وَزَرَابِيُّ مَبْثُوثَةٌ ﴾
(And Zarabi, spread out (Mabthuthah).) Ibn `Abbas said, "Az-Zarabi are carpets.'' This was also said by Ad-Dahhak and others. Here the word Mabthuthah means placed here and there for whoever would like to sit upon them.