Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 55. Ar-Rahman, Introduction

Introduction to Rahmaan
Which was revealed in Makkah

Imam Ahmad recorded that Zirr said that a man said ﴿to Ibn Mas`ud﴾: "How is this recited: "Ma'in Ghayri Yasin or Asin'' He asked him, "Are you that proficient in reciting the whole Qur'an'' He replied, "I recite the Mufassal section in one Rak`ah.'' So he said, "Woe to you! Do you recite the Qur'an in haste, as if it is poetry I know that the Prophet used to recite two Surahs from the beginning of the Mufassal section (in one Rak`ah).'' And Ibn Mas`ud considered Surat Ar-Rahman to be the beginning of the Mufassal section. Abu `Isa At-Tirmidhi recorded that Jabir said, "The Messenger of Allah went to his Companions and recited Surat Ar-Rahman from beginning to end for them, but they did not say anything. The Prophet said,

«لَقَدْ قَرَأْتُهَا عَلَى الْجِنِّ لَيْلَةَ الْجِنِّ فَكَانُوا أَحْسَنَ مَرْدُودًا مِنْكُمْ، كُنْتُ كُلَّمَا أَتَيْتُ عَلَى قَوْلِهِ:
﴿فَبِأَىِّ ءَالاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ ﴾
قَالُوا: لَا بِشَيْءٍ مِنْ نِعَمِكَ رَبَّنَا نُكَذِّبُ فَلَكَ الْحَمْد»
(I recited it to the Jinns, on the night of the Jinns and their response was better than yours! Whenever I recited Allah's statement: (Then which of the blessings of your Lord will you both deny)( They said, "None of Your favors do we deny, our Lord! All praise is due to you.'') At-Tirmidhi recorded it and he said, "This Hadith is Gharib.'' Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar also collected this Hadith. Abu Ja`far Ibn Jarir recorded that `Abdullah bin `Umar said that the Messenger of Allah recited Surat Ar-Rahman, or it was recited before him, and he said,

«مَا لِيَ أَسْمَعُ الْجِنَّ أَحْسَنَ جَوَابًا لِرَبِّهَا مِنْكُمْ؟»
(Why do I hear the Jinn giving a better response to their Lord than you) They said, "Why is that, O Allah's Messenger'' He said,

«مَا أَتَيْتُ عَلَى قَوْلِ اللهِ تَعَالَى:
﴿فَبِأَىِّ ءَالاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ ﴾
إِلَّا قَالَتِ الْجِنُّ: لَا بِشَيْءٍ مِنْ نِعَمِ رَبِّنَا نُكَذِّب»
(Whenever I recited the statement of Allah the Exalted, (Then which of the blessings of your Lord will you both deny)( The Jinn responded by saying, "None of the favors of our Lord do we deny.'')'' Al-Hafiz Al-Bazzar also collected this Hadith.

﴿بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ ﴾
In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.