Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 54. Al-Qamar, Ayaat 33 To 40

كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ لُوطٍ بِالنُّذُرِ٣٣إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حَاصِبًا إِلَّا آلَ لُوطٍ ۖ نَجَّيْنَاهُمْ بِسَحَرٍ٣٤نِعْمَةً مِنْ عِنْدِنَا ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي مَنْ شَكَرَ٣٥وَلَقَدْ أَنْذَرَهُمْ بَطْشَتَنَا فَتَمَارَوْا بِالنُّذُرِ٣٦وَلَقَدْ رَاوَدُوهُ عَنْ ضَيْفِهِ فَطَمَسْنَا أَعْيُنَهُمْ فَذُوقُوا عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ٣٧وَلَقَدْ صَبَّحَهُمْ بُكْرَةً عَذَابٌ مُسْتَقِرٌّ٣٨فَذُوقُوا عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ٣٩وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ٤٠
33. The people of Lut denied the warnings. 34. Verily, We sent against them Hasib (a violent storm of stones), except the family of Lut, them We saved in the last hour of the night, 35. As a favor from Us. Thus do We reward him who gives thanks. 36. And he indeed had warned them of Our punishment, but they doubted the warnings! 37. And they indeed sought to shame his guests. So, We blinded their eyes (saying), "Then taste you My torment and My warnings.'' 38. And verily, an abiding torment seized them early in the morning. 39. Then taste you My torment and My warnings. 40. And indeed, We have made the Qur'an easy to understand and remember; then is there any that will remember

The Story of the People of the Prophet Lut

Allah the Exalted states that the people of Lut defied and denied their Messenger and committed sodomy, the awful immoral sin that no people in the history of mankind had committed before. This is why Allah destroyed them with a type of torment that He never inflicted upon any nation before them. Allah the Exalted commanded Jibril, peace be upon him, to raise their cities to the sky and then turn them upside down over them, followed by stones made of marked Sijjil. So He said here:

﴿إِنَّآ أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حَـصِباً إِلاَّ آلَ لُوطٍ نَّجَّيْنَـهُم بِسَحَرٍ ﴾
(Verily, We sent against them Hasib (a violent storm of stones) except the family of Lut, them We saved in the last hour of the night.) They left the city in the last part of the night and were saved from the torment that struck their people, none of whom believed in Lut. And even Lut's wife suffered the same end as her people. Allah's Prophet Lut left Sodom with his daughters in safety, unharmed. Allah said,

﴿كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِى مَن شَكَرَوَلَقَدْ أَنذَرَهُمْ بَطْشَتَنَا﴾
(Thus do We reward him who gives thanks. And he indeed had warned them of Our punishment,) meaning, before the torment struck his people, he warned them of Allah's torment and punishment. They did not heed the warning, nor listen to Lut, but instead doubted and disputed the warning.

﴿وَلَقَدْ رَاوَدُوهُ عَن ضَيْفِهِ﴾
(And they indeed sought to shame his guests) that is the night the angels Jibril, Mika'il and Israfil came to him in the shape of handsome young men, as a test from Allah for Lut's people. Lut hosted his guests, while his wife, the evil old one, sent a message to her people informing them of Lut's guests. They came to him in haste from every direction, and Lut had to close the door in their faces. They came during the night and tried to break the door; Lut tried to fend them off, while shielding his guests from them, saying,

﴿هَـؤُلآءِ بَنَاتِى إِن كُنْتُمْ فَـعِلِينَ﴾
(These are my daughters, if you must act (so).) (15:71), in reference to their women,

﴿قَالُواْ لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا لَنَا فِى بَنَاتِكَ مِنْ حَقٍّ﴾
(They said: "Surely, you know that we have neither any desire nor need of your daughters!'')(11:79), meaning, `we do not have any desire for women,'

﴿وَإِنَّكَ لَتَعْلَمُ مَا نُرِيدُ﴾
(and indeed you know well what we want!)(11:79) When the situation became serious and they insisted on coming in, Jibril went out to them and struck their eyes with the tip of his wing, causing them to lose their sight. They went back feeling for the walls to guide them, threatening Lut with what would befall him in the morning. Allah the Exalted said,

﴿وَلَقَدْ صَبَّحَهُم بُكْرَةً عَذَابٌ مُّسْتَقِرٌّ ﴾
(And verily, an abiding torment seized them early in the morning.) meaning, a torment that they had no way of escaping or avoiding,

﴿فَذُوقُواْ عَذَابِى وَنُذُرِ وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْءَانَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِن مُّدَّكِرٍ ﴾
(Then taste you My torment and My warnings. And indeed, We have made the Qur'an easy to understand and remember; then is there any that will remember)