Tafsir Ibn Kathir- Surah 45. Al-Jathiya, Ayaat 30 To 37

فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ فَيُدْخِلُهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْمُبِينُ٣٠وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَفَلَمْ تَكُنْ آيَاتِي تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَاسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ وَكُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا مُجْرِمِينَ٣١وَإِذَا قِيلَ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ وَالسَّاعَةُ لَا رَيْبَ فِيهَا قُلْتُمْ مَا نَدْرِي مَا السَّاعَةُ إِنْ نَظُنُّ إِلَّا ظَنًّا وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُسْتَيْقِنِينَ٣٢وَبَدَا لَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا عَمِلُوا وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ٣٣وَقِيلَ الْيَوْمَ نَنْسَاكُمْ كَمَا نَسِيتُمْ لِقَاءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَٰذَا وَمَأْوَاكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ نَاصِرِينَ٣٤ذَٰلِكُمْ بِأَنَّكُمُ اتَّخَذْتُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ هُزُوًا وَغَرَّتْكُمُ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا ۚ فَالْيَوْمَ لَا يُخْرَجُونَ مِنْهَا وَلَا هُمْ يُسْتَعْتَبُونَ٣٥فَلِلَّهِ الْحَمْدُ رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَرَبِّ الْأَرْضِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ٣٦وَلَهُ الْكِبْرِيَاءُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ٣٧
30. Then, as for those who believed and did good deeds, their Lord will admit them to His mercy. That will be the evident success. 31. But as for those who disbelieved (it will be said to them): "Were not Our Ayat recited to you But you were proud, and you were a people who were criminals.'' 32. And when it was said: "Verily, Allah's promise is the truth, and there is no doubt about the coming of the Hour,'' you said: "We know not what is the Hour: we do not think it but conjecture, and we have no firm convincing belief (therein).'' 33. And the evil of what they did will appear to them, and that which they used to mock at will completely encircle them. 34. And it will be said: "This Day We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours. And your abode is the Fire, and there is none to help you.'' 35. This, because you took the revelations of Allah in mockery, and the life of the world deceived you. So this Day, they shall not be taken out from there (Hell), nor shall they be returned to the worldly life. 36. So all praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth, and the Lord of all that exists. 37. And His is the majesty in the heavens and the earth, and He is Al-`Aziz, Al-Hakim.

Allah states to us His judgement in His creation on the Day of Resurrection,

﴿فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّـلِحَـتِ﴾
(Then, as for those who believed and did good deeds,) Those whose hearts believed and their limbs performed good deeds, in sincerity to Allah and conforming with Islamic legislation;

﴿فَيُدْخِلُهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ فِى رَحْمَتِهِ﴾
(their Lord will admit them to His mercy. ) and that is Paradise. In the Sahih, Allah said to Paradise;

«أَنْتِ رَحْمَتِي، أَرْحَمُ بِكِ مَنْ أَشَاء»
("You are My mercy, with which I grant mercy to whom I will,'') Allah said;

﴿ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْمُبِينُ﴾
(That will be the evident success.) clear and apparent. Allah said,

﴿وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَفَلَمْ تَكُنْ ءَايَـتِى تُتْلَى عَلَيْكُمْ فَاسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ﴾
(But as for those who disbelieved (it will be said to them): "Were not Our Ayat recited to you But you were proud...'') They will be admonished and criticized with this statement, that means, `have not the Ayat of Ar-Rahman been recited to you But you did not follow them out of pride and turned away upon hearing them,'

﴿وَكُنتُمْ قَوْماً مُّجْرِمِينَ﴾
(and you were a people who were criminals.), `by your actions, as well as, the denial that your hearts contained.'

﴿وَإِذَا قِيلَ إِنَّ وعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ وَالسَّاعَةُ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهَا﴾
(And when it was said: "Verily, Allah's promise is the truth, and there is no doubt about the coming of the Hour,'') `when the believers said these words to you;'

﴿قُلْتُم مَّا نَدْرِى مَا السَّاعَةُ﴾
(you said: "We know not what is the Hour...'') `we do not recognize what you are talking about,'

﴿إِن نَّظُنُّ إِلاَّ ظَنّاً﴾
(we do not think it but conjecture,) `we only remotely think that it might come,'

﴿وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُسْتَيْقِنِينَ﴾
(and we have no firm convincing belief (therein).) `we are not sure of it.' Allah said,

﴿وَبَدَا لَهُمْ سَيِّئَـتُ مَا عَمِلُواْ﴾
(And the evil of what they did will appear to them,) the repercussion of their evil deeds will become apparent to them,

﴿وَحَاقَ بِهِم﴾
(and will completely encircle them.) from all directions,

﴿مَا كَانُواْ بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِءُونَ﴾
(that which they used to mock at) of the coming torment and punishment,

﴿وَقِيلَ الْيَوْمَ نَنسَاكُمْ﴾
(And it will be said: "This Day We will forget you...'') `We will treat you as if We have forgotten you, casting you in the fire of Jahannam,'

﴿كَمَا نَسِيتُمْ لِقَآءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَـذَا﴾
(as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours.) `and did not work for it because you did not believe in its coming,'

﴿وَمَأْوَاكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِّن نَّـصِرِينَ﴾
(And your abode is the Fire, and there is none to help you.) In the Sahih, it is reported that Allah the Exalted will ask some of His servants on the Day of Resurrection,

«أَلَمْ أُزَوِّجْكَ؟ أَلَمْ أُكْرِمْكَ؟ أَلَمْ أُسَخِّرْ لَكَ الْخَيْلَ وَالْإِبِلَ، وَأَذَرْكَ تَرْأَسُ وَتَرْبَعُ؟ فَيَقُولُ: بَلَى يَارَبِّ. فَيَقُولُ: أَفَظَنَنْتَ أَنَّكَ مُلَاقِيَّ؟ فَيَقُولُ: لَا. فَيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَى: فَالْيَوْمَ أَنْسَاكَ كَمَا نَسِيتَنِي»
("Have I not given you a spouse, honored you and subjected the camels and horses to you Have I not allowed you to be a chief and a master'' The servant will say in answer, "Yes, O Lord!'' Allah will say, "Did you think that you would ever meet Me'' He will say, "No.'' Allah the Exalted will say, "then this Day, I will forget you as you forgot Me.'') Allah the Exalted said,

﴿ذَلِكُم بِأَنَّكُمُ اتَّخَذْتُمْ ءَايَـتِ اللَّهِ هُزُواً﴾
(This, because you took the revelations of Allah in mockery.) `We gave you this punishment as retribution because you mocked Allah's proofs that He sent to you, and made them the subject of jokes and jest,'

﴿وَغَرَّتْكُمُ الْحَيَوةُ الدُّنْيَا﴾
(and the life of the world deceived you.) `this life fooled you and you were seduced by to it, thus becoming among the ultimate losers,'

﴿فَالْيَوْمَ لاَ يُخْرَجُونَ مِنْهَا﴾
(So this Day, they shall not be taken out from there), from Hellfire,

﴿وَلاَ هُمْ يُسْتَعْتَبُونَ﴾
(nor shall they be returned to the worldly life.) no apologies shall be sought from them, but they will be punished without limit or delay, just as a group of the believers will enter Paradise without limit or delay. After Allah mentioned His judgement for the believers and the disbelievers, He said,

﴿فَلِلَّهِ الْحَمْدُ رَبِّ السَّمَـوَتِ وَرَبِّ الاٌّرْضِ﴾
(So all praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth,) He is their Owner and the Owner of all that is in and on them, and surely,

﴿رَبِّ الْعَـلَمِينَ﴾
(and the Lord of all that exists.) Allah said next,

﴿وَلَهُ الْكِبْرِيَآءُ فِى السَّمَـوَتِ وَالاٌّرْضِ﴾
(And His is the majesty in the heavens and the earth, ) meaning, the kingship, according to Mujahid. This Ayah means, Allah is the Almighty, Worthy of all praise; everything and everyone is subservient and in complete need of and dependent upon Him. In an authentic Hadith, the Prophet said,

«يَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَى: الْعَظَمَةُ إِزَارِي، وَالْكِبْرِيَاءُ رِدَائِي، فَمَنْ نَازَعَنِي وَاحِدًا مِنْهُمَا أَسْكَنْتُهُ نَارِي»
(Allah the Exalted said, "Glory is My robe and pride is My garment; whoever rivals Me for either of them, I will make him reside in My Fire!'') Muslim collected a similar Hadith. Allah said,

﴿وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ﴾
(and He is the Al-`Aziz,) Who is never resisted or rivaled,

﴿الْحَكِيمُ﴾
(Al-Hakim) all wise in His statements, actions, legislation and the decree that He appoints; all glory and praise are due to Him, none has the right to be worshipped but He, Alone. This is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Jathiyah. All praise and thanks are due to Allah alone.